 
VOLUME XX, 2017  1 
Date of publication xxxx 00, 0000, date of current version xxxx 00, 0000.  
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/ ACCESS. 2022.Doi  Number  
On the Impact of Refactorings on Software 
Attack Surface   
Estomii  Edward1 (Student),  Ally S. Nyamawe1, Member, IEEE,  and Noe Elisa1 
1Department of Computer Science and Engineering , The University  of Dodoma , Dodoma , Tanzania   
Corresponding author: Estomii  Edward  (e-mail: eestomii@gmail.com ). 
 
This work was carried out with the aid of a grant in the UNESCO -TWAS programme, "Seed Grant  
for African Principal Investigators" financed by the German Federal Ministry of Education and  
Research (BMBF). The views expressed herein do not necessarily represent those of UNESCO -TWAS  
or BMBF.  
ABSTRACT  Refactoring  is one of the techniques mostly employed by software developers to improve the 
quality attributes of their systems. However, little has been done to investigate how refactoring operations 
specifically aimed at improving the internal structure of software can impact its security. Refactoring usually 
entails different code change operations including the decomposition of classes, methods, and the reallocation 
of code elements. While this refinement aims to improve the internal design of a system,  it might inadvertently 
disperse security -critical code elements throughout the codebase. Consequently, such dispersion could affect  
the software attack surface. To this end, this paper presents an empirical study of 30 open -source software 
systems developed in Python, C, and Java script . The study scrutinized two subsequent versions of each 
subject application to uncover the refactoring operations applied and the trend of  the software attack surface . 
Specifically, the study focused on the injection or remov al of bugs, code smells and other vulnerabilities 
aiming to discern the impact of refactorings on the software attack surface. Data was collected using well -
known tools, namely SonarQube, RefDiff, and PyReff. The findings suggest that refactorings can have  
multiple impacts  (i.e., positive, negative, or neutral) on bugs, code smells, and vulnerabilities. The findings 
further confirm that developers must be aware of the combination or sequence of refactoring operations that 
can improve software quality withou t compromising its security.  
INDEX TERMS  Attack Surface, Bugs, Code Smells, Refactoring, Vulnerabilities  
 
I. INTRODUCTION  
Refactoring is defined as “the process of changing the 
internal working or structure of a software system without 
causing any change to the external behaviour of the system” 
[1]. According to  Fowler and Beck [2], software refactoring 
has been  widely used by software developers to improve 
software quality by changing the internal structure while 
leaving the external structure unchanged. Rochimah et al. [3] 
supported this observation by listing the benefits of software 
refactoring which include : eliminating code smells, helping 
to find bugs, making developer s program faster, improving 
the quality of software design, improving code readability, 
improving software maintenance and extensibility, and 
reducing software evolution time.  Refactoring techniques are 
commonly used in software maintenance as they are highly 
recommended strategies employed by developers to improve 
software security by addressing vulnerabilities that attackers  can exploit  [4],[5]. Because an attacker could exploit an 
attack surface to prevent the system from working properly. 
However, the impact s of refactoring on the software attack 
surface are not well -documented and are still uncertain, 
despite the popularity  of refactoring  in software maintenance 
[6]. Previous scholars such as  [7] and [8] found that there is 
a positive and significant relationship between refactoring 
and software security while [9] found that despite security 
improvement  refactoring  also increases the attack surface 
due to the created abstractions.  
Most of the research in software refactoring has 
mainly focused on improving the design of existing code [2], 
securing information flows [10], fixing bugs [11], improv ing 
software quality [12],[13],[14], and code smell s removal 
[15].  However, these studies did not specifically investigate  
the effects of refactorings on software attack surface. 
Therefore, conducting an in -depth empirical evaluation of E. Edward et al.: On the Impact of Refactorings on Software Attack Surface                                                                                           
the impacts of refactorings on software attack surface is 
crucial . 
Abid et al. [16] proposed a security -aware 
refactoring approach that utilizes  the Apriori algorithm to 
establish the associations between implemented refactorings 
and the fitness function employed to improve  software 
security. The methodology was evaluated by conducting 
empirical studies and experiments on open -source projects. 
The findings show that certain refactorings when performed 
with security awareness, can have a positive impact by 
reducing security v ulnerabilities and improving overall 
system security. Abid et al.  [9] proposed a security -aware 
refactoring approach that considers the impact of refactoring 
on software security. The author proposed a systematic 
process for identifying potential security vulnerabilities 
during the refactoring process and developing security -
aware refactoring patterns to address identified 
vulnerabilities. The finding s indicate that security 
vulnerabilities can effectively be addressed in software 
systems by identifying and considering trade -offs between 
security and other qualities during r efactoring. Siavvas  et al.  
[17] proposed a static analysis technique to enhance software 
security by applying  refactoring. The study explored several 
methodologies, including data flow analysis, control flow 
analysis, and symbolic execution, highlighting how these 
techniques can be utilized to identify security vulnerabilities 
and guide code refactoring efforts to improve the security of 
the software. The study findings were evaluated using case 
studies and was revealed that the static analysis approach 
enhances security by promoting effective refactoring 
practices. However, limited information is available 
regard ing the impact s of refactorings on the software attack 
surface .  
To this end, this paper presents an empirical study that 
involved 30 open -source software systems, developed in 
Python, C, and Java script  to discern the impact of 
refactorings on software attack surface. We analyzed  the 
effect of frequently applied refactorings on bugs, code 
smells, and vulnerabilities. Our investigation focuses on two 
main aspects: firstly, we aim to determine the most  common 
applied refactorings and the most prevalent elements of the 
software attack surface . Secondly, we seek to evaluate the 
effectiveness of refactoring in addressing bugs, code smells, 
and vulnerabilities in open -source software projects. Using 
the state -of-the-art tools namely SonarQube, RefDiff, and 
PyReff , we extracted a total of 3,523 applied refactorings, 
18,303 instances of code smells, 2,975 instances of bugs, and 
43 instances of vulnerabilities  that formulated the basis of 
our analysis in this study .  
The contributions of this paper are as follows:  
1) This paper presents an empirical study that assesses 
the impact of refactorings on software attack 
surface.  
2) This paper provides a methodological contribution 
to how experiments can be used to uncover the 
common software attack surface and evaluate how 
they are impacted by refactoring. In addition, this study serves as a foundation for ongoing research 
on security -focused refactoring to improve software 
quality.  
3) The findings and recommendations presented in 
this paper can be a reference for other researchers 
interested in undertaking additional research in this 
field. 
 
The subsequent sections of this paper  are structured in 
the following manner: Section II summarizes previous 
studies in refactorings and attack surface to set an 
understanding of these key aspects and what has been done 
so far. Section III describes the methodology used in this 
study, whereas Section IV presents our experimental results. 
Section V presents a discussion of the findings. Finally, 
Section VI concludes the paper and highlights  areas for 
further research.  
 
II.  RELATED WORK  
This section presents previous studies and concepts relevant to 
this study.  
A. REFACTORING  
Refactoring is a systematic technique for modifying the 
internal structure of an existing codebase without affecting 
its external behavior . Originally [2] define d refactoring as 
“A change made to the internal structure of software to make 
it easier to understand and cheaper to modify without 
changing its observable behavior. It is a disciplined way to 
clean up code that minimizes the chances of introducing 
bugs.” Opdyke [18] defined refactoring as the process of 
making program modifications that enable design, evolution, 
and reuse while maintaining the functionality of the software 
application. Despite being an old definition, it is still valid to 
date. Refactoring is the proc ess of altering a software system 
to make it simpler to understand and less expensive to 
modify, without changing the external behavior [19]. Alves 
et al.  [1] have further defined refactoring as “the process of 
changing the internal working or structure of a software 
system, without causing any change to the external behavior  
of the system”.  The goal is to improve its comprehensibility, 
adaptability, and maintainability while minimizing  the 
likelihood of introducing bugs and code smells.  
Refactoring  entails source code modifications that take 
place at various points throughout the development, evolution, 
and maintenance of a program [20]. Murphy -hill [21] 
uncovered two tactics for implementing refactorings such as 
floss and root canal refactoring. The use of floss refactoring is 
for implementing new features or resolving bugs. However, in 
root canal refactoring the developer's primary objective is to 
apply refactorings to enhance the code's quality. Murphy -Hill 
et al.  [22] have demonstrated that floss refactoring is a widely 
adopted practice.  Refactorings are detectable through the 
utilization  of both automated and manual tools. In software 
maintenance projects, automated refactoring detection tools 
outperform their manual counterparts [23],[24],[25],[26]. 
  E. Edward  et al.: On the Impact of Refactorings on Software Attack Surface  
2 VOLUME XX, 20 24 
B. ATTACK SURFACE OF SOFTWARE SYSTEMS  
The attack surface of the software system encompasses the 
entry, and exit points of a system, the data that is transmitted 
through these points, and the code that safeguards both the 
paths and the data [27]. The attack surface of software refers 
to the total number of potential entry points through which 
unauthorized  users can attempt to input or extract data from 
a system or environment to compromise a system, 
application, device, or network [28],[29]. For example, 
Kurmus et al.  [30] highlighted that the presence of 
vulnerabilities in the Kernel can lead to security weaknesses 
and defects in various operating systems. By addressing 
these vulnerabilities, the software attack surface can be 
minimized , thereby enhancing the software's resistance to 
attacks.  Theisen et al.  [31] confirmed that software bugs and 
vulnerabilities can be regarded as the attack surface of any 
software because they provide potential entry points and 
opportunities for attackers to gain unauthorized access to the 
software and hence compromise its security. Similar findings 
were confirmed by  Szefer et al . [32] that software 
vulnerabilities and bugs serve as prominent examples of the 
software attack surface. Furthermore, Alraddadi et al. [33] 
has observed a correlation between code smells and software 
vulnerabilities and established that code smells can give rise 
to security vulnerabilities.  
C. EFFECTS OF REFACTORINGS ON BUGS  
Bug refers to a n error, defect , or flaw in a computer program 
or system that leads to the generation of an inaccurate or 
unforeseen outcome, or causes the program to behave in 
unintended manners [34]. Software bugs also refer to 
imperfections, flaws, errors, faults, inconsistencies, or 
deviations in computer programs or systems [35]. The study 
conducted in  [36] highlighted that there are sets of bugs that 
manifest in the codebase as a result of certain refactorings, 
and on the other hand, there are also sets of bugs that trigger 
developers to apply refactoring . The study conducted by  
Almogahed et al.  [37] provided a comprehensive analysis of 
the impact of refactorings on software quality. A total of 30 
empirical studies were analyzed  to investigate the effects of 
refactorings on bug reduction in software. The findings of 
these studies revealed that refactorings can have both 
positive and negative impacts on bug reduction.  Da Costa  et 
al. [38] proposed a framework for assessing the effectiveness 
of the Sliwerski, Zimmermann, and Zeller (SZZ) algorithm 
in detecting software bugs. The findings of the study indicate 
that the process of refactoring in software maintenance can 
potentially result in adverse effects, specifically the 
introduction of bugs in the software.  
 Gigante et al.  [39] conducted an empirical 
investigation on software projects to evaluate  the efficacy of 
refactorings in removing software bugs. The results 
indicated that certain refactorings have the potential to 
introduce additional bugs into the software . These findings 
are consistent with the study conducted by  Shafiq et al. [36], 
which suggests that the application of refactorings can 
potentially introduce bugs in software even after successful implementation. Moreover, [40] conducted a longitudinal 
study that analysed  20,689 refactorings and 1,033 bug 
reports from 5 Java open -source projects. The findings 
indicated that bugs are introduced into the refactored code 
when refactorings are applied to the code. In addition, code 
elements that are affected by refactorings performed 
alongside other changes are more likely to have bugs 
compared to those affected by pure refactorings.  
D. IMPACT  OF REFACTORINGS ON CODE SMELLS  
Code smells refer to implementation issues that arise due to 
inadequate design and/or coding choices  [41]. These are 
perceived as problematic issues that can complicate the 
maintenance and evolution of software [2],[42]. Code smells 
can be introduced by software developers either  during the 
system's early stages of development or as the system 
progresses over time  [41] and have been associated  with the 
increase in risk of vulnerabilities and bugs according to 
Palomba  et al.[43]. Numerous studies have been conducted 
to examine the effects of refactorings on code smells. 
Bibiano et al.  [44] investigated the use of composite 
refactoring to eliminate code smells. The results showed that 
combining the  Extract Method, and Move Method  removes 
both Long Method and Feature Envy code smells. However, 
in the same study, composites formed by Extract Methods  
not only remove Long Method code smells but also introduce 
Feature Envy and Intensive Couplings code smells into the 
software.  Hamdi et al.  [41] revealed that Extract Method, 
Move Method, Extract and Move Method, Rename Method, 
and Push Down Method  refactorings were applied to remove 
complex class and long method code smells. This finding 
aligns with the  catalogue  proposed in [2]  stating that the 
mentioned refactorings could be applied to fix  complex class 
and long method code smells. The Extract Method  
refactoring is frequently applied to address the following 
code smell types : Lazy Class, Complex Class, Long Method, 
and Feature Envy. However, thi s finding  also implies that 
refactorings are context -dependent and that there is no single 
refactoring that can be used to address  a specific code smell 
[41].  
Further, Cedrim et al.  [45] analyzed  various types of 
refactoring and found that the application of these 
refactorings did not reduce code smells. Instead, the 
introduction of new code smells was observed. The study 
examined 23 software projects and conducted analyses on 13 
different types o f code smells. The findings revealed that 
57% of the refactorings performed did not effectively 
remove code smells. Additionally, 9.7% of the refactorings 
successfully eliminated code smells, while 33.3% of the 
refactorings introduced new code sme lls into the software.  
Moreover,  the study conducted by Yoshida et al.  [46], 
investigated the correlation between code smells and 
refactorings in desktop applications. The analysis indicated 
that the refactorings successfully eliminated code smells by 
a mere 2.24%, while simultaneously introducing new code 
smells at a rate of 2.6 6%. E. Edward et al.: On the Impact of Refactorings on Software Attack Surface                                                                                           
 Halepmollas and Tosun  [47] performed research to 
determine how refactoring affects code smells. The study 
explored 33 Java projects and detected 57,528 refactorings, 
37,553 smells, 27,340 faults, and 134,812 commits. The 
findings indicate that certain types of refactoring are utilized  
more frequently by programmers. The study also showed 
that code smells are typically eliminated or remain 
unaffected by refactorings . Counsell  et al.  [48] conducted an 
empirical study on the removal of code smells by analyzing  
a set of five open -source Java projects followed by 
proprietary software developed in C# and finally a 
theoretical study on why smell -related  refactorings were not 
addressed. The study's key findings indicate no evidence of 
a widespread elimination of smells. However, it was 
observed that smells that could be resolved through simple 
refactoring  operations  were eliminated in favor  of smells that 
required more complex refactoring.  
 
E. EFFECTS OF REFACTORINGS ON 
VULNERABILITIES  
Vulnerabilities are defined as unintended characteristics of a 
computer component or system configuration s that increase 
the risk of an adverse event or loss occurring through 
inadvertent exposure, malicious attack, or accidental exposure [7]. Vulnerability in computer software refers to a 
specific weakness present in the code that allows an attacker 
to bypass the implemented security measures [49]. 
Therefore, vulnerabilities that are associated with bypassing 
a restriction refer to situations where an unauthenticated 
party can gain access to services or read and manipulate files 
[50]. The study conducted by  Ikegami et al.  [28] examined 
the application of refactoring techniques in addressing 
security vulnerabilities.  The results  revealed that the 
identified vulnerabilities within the 143 analyzed  Maven 
libraries were successfully addressed through the 
implementation of refactoring techniques. According to the 
white paper by  New Relic  [51], the goal of refactoring is to 
reduce the occurrence of security vulnerabilities in the 
software system.  
 
III. METHODOLOGY  
This section presents a summary of the stages required to 
address our research questions. The proposed approach  
consists of three steps as represented in Figure 1. The steps 
are:  selecting subject systems, detecting refactoring s, and 
identifying attack surfaces . These steps were adopted from  
the study by  Hamdi et al.  [41] and modified accordingly to 
fit the current study . 
 
 
 
 
 
FIGURE 1.  Overview of the Proposed Approach.  
A. SELECTION OF SUBJECT SYSTEMS  
The first phase of our approach  involves selecting open -
source software projects from the GitHub repository to serve 
as subject systems for the study. The reason for selecting 
open -source software systems is simply because they are 
publicly available on software repositories and their source 
code and change histories can be easily accessed  [52]. 
However, they are constantly exposed to unavoidable 
security threats such as bugs, code smells, and vulnerabilities. According to National Vulnerability 
Database (NVD) statistics, in 2022 there are more than 
25,102 known exploited vulnerabilities related to open -
source software worldwide. We selected 30 software 
projects  developed in Python, C , and Javascript . Each 
considered project had a history of being refactored, had 
multiple versions, and varied in terms of project size.  The 
projects that have been selected for analysis are outlined in 
Table 1.   
 
 
 
Selection of 
subject 
systems  
30 Open -
source 
software  
Attack 
surface 
detection  
Refactorings 
detection  
List of Attack 
Surface  
List of applied 
refactorings  
Refactorings 
impacts on attack 
surface   E. Edward  et al.: On the Impact of Refactorings on Software Attack Surface  
2 VOLUME XX, 20 24 
Table 1: Overview of the Subject Systems  
Name  Lines of Code  Name  Lines of Code  Name  Lines of Code  
Angular.js  4,090  jquery  2,826  netdata  51,957  
Atom  16,614  jq 437 libuv  189 
React  6,549  reveal.js  11,299  keras  200,614  
Redis  8,285  emscripten  97,111  scrapy  47,267  
Axios  575 Semantic -UI 77,603  huey  5,950  
Dit 16,480  swoole -src 16,973  Beets  39,688  
texar  29,380  vue 1,996  DeepSpeed  62,597  
celery  58,838  webpack  2,069  sanic  33,527  
ffmpeg  4,135  wrk 6,167  PyMySQL  6,549  
git 4,738  material -ui 698 Ansible  180,434  
TOTAL.:  Projects: 30, Lines of Code: 995,635  
 
B. PREVIOUS REFACTORINGS DETECTION  
We collected all the refactoring s applied to the selected 
open -source software projects. We used PyReff  [23] and 
RefDiff  [53] to facilitate the identification of applied 
refactorings. PyReff is a tool that was developed specifically 
for mining refactoring operations in Python projects.  It has 
been reported that PyReff attains a recall of 95% and 
precision of 79% [23]. PyReff provides the capability to 
identify a range of prevalent refactoring types, as proposed 
by Fowler and Beck  [2]. Similarly, RefDiff is a tool that was developed for 
mining refactoring operations in C and JavaScript projects.  
It has been documented that RefDiff attains a recall of 88% 
and a precision of 100% [53].  RefDiff provides the 
capability to detect thirteen (13) different types of 
refactoring operations . The detection of refactorings between 
two revisions of a system is accomplished through the 
utilization  of a combination of heuristics based on static 
analysis and code similarity [25]. We extracted eight (8) 
common refactoring types from the supported refactorings, 
as presented in Table 2.
Table 2: The List of Considered  Refactoring s 
SN Refactoring Type  Description  
1.  Move Method  Moves a method from a class to another class  
2.  Extract Method  Creating a new method from an existing code block.  
3.  Rename Method  Renames Method  
4.  Rename Class  Renames a class  
5.  Inline Method  Reduce the number of unneeded methods while simplifying the code  
6.  Add Parameter  Add a default parameter to the method in all implementors  
7.  Remove Parameter  Removes an unused parameter from all implementors of the method  
8.  Pull Up Method  Move the method to the superclass.  
 E. Edward et al.: On the Impact of Refactorings on Software Attack Surface                                                                                           
 
C. DETECTION OF SOFTWARE ATTACK SURFACE  
In this step we identified bugs, code smells and 
vulnerabilities instances in the source code of the selected 
subject applications. For each project, we conducted a 
comprehensive source code analysis to determine any 
occurrences of  bugs, code smells , and vulnerabilities. 
SonarQube was used to detect such elements of the attack 
surface. SonarQube is a tool for ensuring the quality of code 
by gathering and analyzing  source code and generating 
reports on the code quality of the project  [54]. It brings 
together static and dynamic analysis and allows for the 
constant measurement of quality over time. The tool  offers 
various code analyses, such as static code analysis, code 
coverage, and code duplication analysis. Notably, the 
SonarQube tool utilizes  rule-based static code analysis, 
complexity metrics, and security rule sets to identify bugs, 
code smells, and vulnerabilities in the code base.  
 
D. ANALYZING THE IMPACT OF REFACTORINGS  
Refactorings can have either a positive, negative, or neutral 
impact on the presence of bugs, code smells, and 
vulnerabilities [45][55][14]. This section outlines how each 
instance of refactoring  type is categorized by quantifying the 
number of bugs, code smells, and vulnerabilities that are 
either not affected, introduced , or eliminated because of the 
refactoring s applied.   
Let 𝑃={𝑝1,…,𝑝𝑛} be a set of analyzed  open -source 
software projects. Each project 𝑝 has a set of versions 
𝑉(𝑠)={𝑣1,…,𝑣𝑛} for our case , we considered three 
subsequent versions.  
Let 𝑅 be the refactoring detection function whereby  
𝑅(𝑣𝑖,𝑣𝑖+1)={𝑟1(𝑟𝑡1;𝑒1),….𝑟𝑘(𝑟𝑡𝑘;𝑒𝑘)} provides 
refactoring type denoted as (𝑟𝑡𝑖) and refactored code 
elements denoted as (𝑒𝑖). 
The refactoring function allows us to classify 
refactorings based on their impact on existing bugs, code 
smells, and vulnerabilities. Based on bugs, suppose 𝑒𝑖 
denotes code elements, 𝑟 denotes a particular refactoring  
type, and 𝐵𝑏  denotes bugs before refactoring and 𝐵𝑎 denotes 
bugs after refactoring. Therefore, before refactoring, 
|𝐵𝑏[𝑟](𝑒𝑖)|=𝑥  , whereas, after 𝑟 refactoring was applied, 
|𝐵𝑎[𝑟](𝑒𝑖)|=𝑦. Whereby,  𝑥  and 𝑦 are instances of bugs 
before and after refactoring respectively. Then ,  𝑟 can be 
classified based on the values of 𝑥  and 𝑦. If 𝑥>𝑦,𝑟 reduced 
the instances of bugs on 𝑒𝑖, consequently, 𝑟 is considered a 
positive refactoring. On the other hand, if 𝑥<𝑦,𝑟 increased 
the instances of bugs , hence, 𝑟 is considered a negative 
refactoring. Furthermore, if 𝑥=𝑦,𝑟 is considered a neutral 
refactoring. This was also applied to code smells and 
vulnerabilities. This classification is further summarized in  
Table 3. 
 
 
 Table 3: Example Bugs -Based Refactoring Classification  
Condition  Refactoring Class  
|𝐵𝑏[𝑟](𝑒)|>|𝐵𝑎[𝑟](𝑒)| Positive  
|𝐵𝑏[𝑟](𝑒)|<|𝐵𝑎[𝑟](𝑒)| Negative  
|𝐵𝑏[𝑟](𝑒)|=|𝐵𝑎[𝑟](𝑒)| Neutral  
IV. EXPERIMENT AND RESULTS  
In this section, we present the research questions that this 
study intends to address and highlight  the findings of our 
empirical study followed by the results discussion in  
response to each of the research questions.  
A. RESEARCH QUESTIONS  
Our study aims to answer the following research questions.  
• RQ1:  How about the software attack surface of open -
source software systems? This initial research question 
seeks to empirically identify the software attack 
surface of open -source software systems . 
• RQ2:  What are the commonly applied refactorings 
on the studied subject systems? This research 
question intends to identify refactorings applied to 
open -source software systems through a 
comprehensive code analysis and understand which 
refactorings were commonly applied to the same.  
• RQ3 : What is the impact  of refactorings  on the 
software  attack  surface  of the analyzed  open -source  
software  systems ? The goal of this research question 
is to investigate the impact  of refactorings on the 
software attack surface. This question enables a deeper 
understanding of the connection between refactorings 
and the attack surface, specifically in terms of bugs, 
code smells, and vulnerabilities  
 
To address RQ1, we utilized  the bugs, code smells, and 
vulnerabilities  information  that have been gathered for each 
subject application as outlined in section III ( C). The 
experiment was carried out by performing the static code 
analysis of the selected 30 open -source projects to scan for 
vulnerabilities, bugs, and code smell s. The selection of these 
three elements of the attack surface  is in line with [39] who 
performed a comparative study of the two source code 
analysis tools namely SonarQube and Fortify Static Code 
Analyzer. As mentioned earlier, we use d SonarQube 
Community Edition version 9.6.1 , a software application that 
executes rules given by Gigante  et al. [39] to identify the 
instances of bugs, code smells , and vulnerabilities . 
On the other hand, RQ2  is answered using the 
refactoring instances data collected by PyReff and RefDiff  
from the 30 subject systems . This process enabled us to 
identify the common refactorings applied in open -source 
software projects. As for the refactorings, the study selected 
purposely eight (8) types that belong to the catalogue defined 
by Fowler and Beck  [2] and are also reported to be the 
commonly performed refactorings from other studies [15].  E. Edward  et al.: On the Impact of Refactorings on Software Attack Surface  
2 VOLUME XX, 20 24 
Furthermore, the choice of these eight refactorings is also 
inspired  by Murphy -Hill et al.  [22]. 
To address RQ3, we examine the relationship between 
refactoring operations and the occurrence of bugs, code 
smells, and vulnerabilities. First, we identified the code 
elements containing bugs, code smells, or vulnerabilities in 
a given version of the system. Next, we tracked the 
refactorings applied to these code elements in the subsequent 
version. Finally, we analyzed  to determine the extent to 
which the previously identified bugs, code smells, and 
vulnerabilities were impacted by these refactorings. This 
approach enables us to determine whether these elements of 
the attack surface have been reduced or remain unchanged. 
Additionally, further analysis was conducted on the 
refactored code elements to identify any newly introduced 
bugs, code smells, and vulner abilities. The RQ3 is therefore 
aiming at discerning whether a particular applied refactoring 
operation had a positive, neutral, or negative impact.  
 
B. HOW ABOUT THE SOFTWARE ATTACK SURFACE 
OF OPEN -SOURCE SOFTWARE SYSTEMS? (RQ1)  
 The information revealed by SonarQube helped to 
establish the common attack surface elements available in 
software projects that have an impact on software security, 
on the one hand, and help the developer to understand the 
most occurring elements of attack  surface  on the other hand.  
The distribution of bugs, code smells and vulnerabilities are 
presented in Table 4. 
Table 4: The Distribution of Attack Surface  
S/N Attack Surface  Instances  Percentage  
1.  Code Smells  18,303  85.8 
2.  Bugs  2,975  14 
3.  Vulnerabilities  43 0.2 
 Totals  21,321  100 
 
As presented in Table 4, code smells contribute significantly 
to the total number of attack surface elements. Code smells 
have a total of 18,303 (85.8%) instances. This implie s that 
code smells are the most common type of attack surface on 
the analyzed  project . The second most common attack 
surface of the studied open -source software projects was 
bugs which contributed to a total of 2,975 (14%) instances of 
attack surfaces. Vulnerabilities are the least common type of 
attack surface  elements  which contributed to 0.2% (43 out of 
21,321) of all instances of the attacks in the analysed 
projects. This implies that vulnerabilities in the analyzed  
software accounted for a smaller  fraction of the attack 
surface than others.  However, i t is important to note that the 
vulnerabilities studied here are not exhaustive. Other several 
vulnerabilities were  not considered in this initial attempt of 
our study.  The following subsections highlight each of the 
attack surface elements in detail . 
 1) CODE SMELLS  
The SonarQube tool uncovered a total of 10 distinct code 
smell types in the analyzed  projects, as presented in Table 5.  
Table 5: Distribution of Code Smells in the Studied 
Projects  
S/N Code Smell  Instances  Percentage  
1 Duplicated code  6322  34.5 
2 Speculative generality  3210  17.5 
3 Long parameter list  2579  14.1 
4 Temporary field  2416  13.2 
5 Comments   2323  12.6 
6 Long Method  1112  6.1 
7 Switch statements  218 1.2 
8 Large class  76 0.4 
9 Data Clumps  25 0.1 
10 Feature Envy  22 0.1 
  Totals  18303  100 
 
As shown in the table, t he two most common code smell 
types were Duplicated code and Speculative generality . 
These code smell types accounted for 34.5% and 17.5% 
respectively of all instances. In general, these code smell 
types, which occur with a high frequency, make up a 
significant 50% of the total code smell count. These findings 
were in line with  the  study by Menshawy et al.  [56] which 
indicated that Duplicated code and Speculative generality  
are the most popular code smells among all.  We also 
observed that code smells such as Long Parameter List, 
Temporary  Field, and Comments  are moderately prevalent in 
the analyzed  projects. These code smell types accounted for 
14.1%, 13.2% , and 12.6% of all instances, respectively. In 
general, these three code smell types, which occur with a 
moderate frequency, make up a significant 39.9% of the total 
code smell count. These  findings are suppor ted by   Sotto -
Mayor et al.  [57] who found out that code smells such as  
Long Parameter List, Temporary  field, and Comments  are 
commonly found in software projects.  
Furthermore, we observed that code smells such as 
Long Method , Switch Statement, Data Clumps, Large class, 
and Feature Envy  were slightly prevalent in the analyzed  
projects. These code smell types accounted for 6.1%, 1.2%, 
0.4%, 0.1% and 0.1% of all instances, respectively. In 
general, these five code smell types  accounted for only 7.9% 
of the total code smell instances.  Overall, it has been noticed 
that the highly, moderately, and slightly prevalent code 
smells in the analysis are consistent with the previously 
reported results [56],[43]. In their study, Alraddadi et al.  [33] 
observed a correlation between code smells and software 
vulnerabilities. It has been established that code smells can 
give rise to security vulnerabilities, thereby compromising 
the security of the software and making it susceptible to 
attacks.  
 E. Edward et al.: On the Impact of Refactorings on Software Attack Surface                                                                                           
2) BUGS  
The SonarQube tool identified a total of 7 distinct bugs in the 
selected projects, as presented in Table 6. 
Table 6: The Common Types of Bugs Identified  
SN Bugs  Instances  Percentage  
1 Code Complexity  1783  59.9 
2 Inconsistent Naming 
Convention  546 18.4 
3 Incorrect Data Validation  526 17.7 
4 Insecure Code  60 2 
5 Unused Code  39 1.3 
6 Unhandled Exception  16 0.5 
7 Memory Leak  5 0.2 
Totals  2975  100 
 
As shown in the table , the three most recurring bug types 
were Code Complexity, Inconsistent Naming Convention, 
and Incorrect Data Validation . These three bug types 
accounted for 59.9%, 18.4%, and 17.7%  of total bug 
instances  respectively . In general, these three bugs, which 
occur with a high frequency make up 96% of the total bugs 
count. However, it has been observed that certain bugs are 
moderately common, including Insecure Code, Unused 
Code, Memory Leak, and Unhandled Exceptions compared 
to other types of bugs which accounted for only 4% of total 
bug instances. These bugs have a lower prevalence and make 
up a smaller fraction of the total bugs encountered. As 
expected, the highe r the frequency of a bug, the greater its 
prevalence. Based on the analysis, it was found that the bugs 
that are highly and moderately prevalent in the analyzed  
projects are consistent with those found by Theisen et al.  
[31]. 
 
3) VULNERABILITIES  
A total of 4 distinct vulnerabilities in the selected projects  
were identified  as presented in Table 7. We matched 
vulnerabilities with the corresponding Common Weakness 
Enumeration (CWE) vulnerabilities as reported  in [58].  
Table 7: Distribution of Vulnerabilities in the Studied 
Projects  
S/N Vulnerability Type  Instances  Percentage  
1.  A3 – Injection  29 67.4 
2.  A9 - Security 
Logging and 
Monitoring Failures  9 20.9 
3.  A6 - Vulnerable and 
Outdated 
Components  3 7 
4.  A2 - Cryptographic 
Failures  2 4.7 
Totals  43 100 
 As indicated  in Table 7, we found that A3- Injection  
vulnerabilities  have the highest frequency, making  up a 
significant 67.4%  (29 out of 43)  of the total vulnerability 
instances in the analyzed  projects. According to these 
findings, A3- Injection  is one of the most common 
vulnerability types as compared to others. This finding is 
consistent with  that suggested in  [59]. Moreover, we 
observed some moderately prevalent vulnerabilities like the 
A9 - Security Logging  and Monitoring Failures  and some 
slightly prevalent vulnerabilities such as A2 - Cryptographic 
Failures  and A6 - Vulnerable and Outdated Components . 
The A9 - Security Logging and Monitoring Failures  
vulnerability accounts for 20.9% while the remaining two 
vulnerabilities  (A6 and A2) accounted for 11.7% of total 
vulnerability instances. These findings were in line with the 
study proposed in [60] which suggested that vulnerabilities 
are the attack surface elements of the software system and 
often manifest in either high, moderate , or slight frequency . 
C. WHAT ARE THE MOST FREQUENTLY APPLIED 
REFACTORINGS ( RQ2)  
A total number of 3,523 instances of the applied refactorings 
were detected by  PyReff and RefDiff  from  the 30 analyzed  
projects.  Table 8 presents the most prevalent refactoring 
types applied in the studied project.  
Table 8: The Common Refactoring Types Applied in the 
Studied Projects  
SN Refactoring Type  Instances  Percentage  
1.  Move Method  1,174  33.3 
2.  Extract Method  693 19.7 
3.  Rename Method  551 15.6 
4.  Rename Class  521 14.8 
5.  Inline Method  310 8.8 
6.  Add Parameter  212 6.0 
7.  Remove Parameter  49 1.4 
8.  Pull Up Method  13 0.4 
 Totals  3,523  100 
 
We observed that Move Method , Extract Method , Rename 
Method, and Rename Class  are the most applied refactorings 
accounting for  33.3%, 19.7%, 15.6%, and 14.8% of all 
instances respectively. It is important to acknowledge that 
the relatively large number of Extract Method  refactorings 
may lead to a correspondingly high number of Rename 
Method  refactorings. Notably , when a method undergoes an 
Extract Method  refactoring, it may also require a Rename 
Method refactoring to accurately represent its new purpose. 
In general, we found that the most applied refactorings in the 
analyzed  projects align with the findings of  Hamdi et al.  [41]. 
We also observe d that there are  several moderately 
common ly applied refactorings such as the Inline Method  
with an occurrence of 310 (8.8%) instances and Add 
Parameter  with 212 (6.0%)  instances . On the other hand,  E. Edward  et al.: On the Impact of Refactorings on Software Attack Surface  
2 VOLUME XX, 20 24 
Remove Parameter  and Pull Up Method  are the least 
performed refactoring types with 49  instances  (1.4%) and 13  
instances  (0.4%) respectively.  
 
D. WHAT IS THE IMPACT OF REFACTORINGS ON 
THE SOFTWARE ATTACK SURFACE? (RQ3)  This section presents a synopsis  of the findings on the impact 
of refactorings on bugs, code smells, and vulnerabilities.  
 
1) EFFECTS OF REFACTORINGS ON BUGS  
The refactorings in Table 9 are listed in descending order 
based on the number of instances found in the analyzed  
projects  in relation to bugs .
 
Table 9: Effect of Refactorings on Bugs  
Refactoring Type  Instances  Neutral  Negative  Positive  
Move Method  1168  1046(89.6%)  113(9.7%)  9(0.8%)  
Extract Method  686 545(79.4%)  99(14.4%)  42(6.2%)  
Rename Method  550 477(86.7%)  28(5.1%)  45(8.2%)  
Rename Class  500 195(39%)  51(10.2%)  254(50.8%)  
Inline Method  310 154(49.7%)  147(47.4%)  9(2.9%)  
Add Parameter  212 167(78.8%)  0(0%)  45(21.2%)  
Remove Parameter  49 46(93.8%)  0(0%)  3(6.2%)  
Pull Up Method  13 13(100%)  0(0%)  0(0%)  
Totals  3488  2643(75.8%)  438(12.6%)  407(11.7%)  
We observed that the neutral impact of refactorings on bugs 
was the most common outcome . Out of all refactoring types 
analyzed , the total number of 2,643  refactoring instances  
(i.e., 75.8%  of all instances ) did not result in any changes to 
the existing bugs in the projects. We noted that Move 
Method , Extract Method , Rename Method, Inline Method, 
Add Parameter, Remove Parameter , and Pull Up Method  are 
the most frequently implemented refactorings and at least 
50% of their instances had no impact on bugs.  In contrast to 
Rename Class  refactoring only 39% of its instances had a 
neutral impact on bugs. Moreover, a s shown in Table 9, 
overall, 12.6%  (438 out of 3,488 instances) of  the refactoring  
instances  were found to add bugs to the refactored code 
elements.  
Furthermore, w e observed that only Move Method , 
Extract Method , Rename Method, Rename Class, and Inline 
Method refactorings demonstrated a negative impact . In 
contrast to Inline Method  refactoring which had a significant 
percentage of instances (47.4%) with a negative  impact, the 
rest of the refactorings had a slight negative impact on bugs.  
However, the other three refactorings (i.e., Add Parameter, 
Remove Parameter, and Pull Up Method ) had no negative 
impact on bugs.   In the case of positive impact, surprisingly, 
Rename Class  refactoring had a significant number of 
instances (50.8%) that recorded positive impact, followed by 
Add Parameter  refactoring with only 21.2%.  Other 
refactorings had very few instances with positive impact on 
bugs, whereas, the Pull Up Method  had no positive impact at 
all.     In summary, most of the instances of applied 
refactorings had neutral impacts on the bugs (i.e., 75.8%) and 
almost comparable negative (12.6%) and positive (11.7%)  
impacts. These results further indicate that the effectiveness 
of refactoring strategies is contingent upon the specific 
context in which they are implemented. It would be 
interesting in the future to make further analyses to establish 
how these refactorings lead to positive and negative impacts 
on bugs.  
The results  presented in Table 9 were  produced based 
on bug -detection strategies similar to the one used by Bavota 
et al. [55]. Figure 2 displays the distribution of the impact of 
refactorings on bugs, categorized  as neutral, positive, and 
negative. This analysis was conducted using two 
classification methods: Tight and Bavota thresholds.  The 
thresholds for bug detection were defined in [55]. Macia et 
al. [61] validated the first set of bug detection rules , called 
tight. This strategy is tight because it uses high thresholds to 
detect only critical bug types across projects. The second 
approach, referred to as Bavota, employs relaxed thresholds 
intending to identify  as many bugs as possible as proposed 
by Bavota et al.  [55]. An analysis in Figure 2 demonstrates 
that the proportion of neutral, positive, and negative 
refactorings is the same irrespective of the threshold used for 
bug detection.  
 
 E. Edward et al.: On the Impact of Refactorings on Software Attack Surface                                                                                           
 
FIGURE 2.  The Impact of Refactorings on Bugs.  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2) EFFECTS OF REFACTORINGS ON CODE SMELLS  
 
Table 10: Effects of Refactorings on Code Smells  
Refactoring Type  Instances  Neutral  Negative  Positive  
Move Method  1174  965(82.2%)  164(14%)  45(3.8%)  
Extract Method  693 485(70%)  94(13.6%)  114(16.4%)  
Rename Method  551 302(54.8%)  141(25.6%)  108(19.6%)  
Rename Class  521 214(41.1%)  295(56.6%)  12(2.3%)  
Inline Method  310 47(15.2%)  191(61.6%)  72(23.2%)  
Add Parameter  212 0(0%)  178(80.1%)  34(19.9%)  
Remove Parameter  49 0(0%)  46(93.8%)  3(6.2%)  
Pull Up Method  13 0(0%)  13(100%)  0(0%)  
Totals  3523  2013(57.1%)  1122(31.8%)  388(11.1%)  
 
 
As shown in Table 10, Move Method  has been identified as 
the most frequently performed refactoring. This result is 
consistent with the findings reported in [63] that Move 
Method  refactorings are frequently carried out by 
developers. This is because they can be easily executed either 
manually or by utilizing  the features provided by existing 
IDEs. As shown in Table 10, the analysis revealed that the 
neutral impact of refactorings on code smells was the most 
frequent accounting for 2013  (57.1%)  instances in the 
projects. Specifically, we observed that Move Method , 
Extract Method , Rename Method,  and Rename Class  are the 
most applied refactorings with neutral impact on code smells  
accounting  for 98% of all instances with neutral impact. It is 
worth noting that, the rename refactoring has no specific 
smell to address here and smells corresponding to Move 
Method  and Extract Method , that is, Feature Envy  and Long 
Method  have significantly fewer instances as shown in Table 
5. Therefore, such refactoring s might have been performed 
for other motivations rather than code smell removal.  It is 
also important to acknowledge that the relatively large 
number of Extract Method  refactorings may lead to a 
correspondingly high number of Rename Method  refactorings. This observation was justified in the sense that 
Rename Method  and Rename Class  are respectively the third 
and fourth most common refactoring activities performed in 
the analyzed  open -source software projects.  Moreover, the 
negative and positive impact of refactoring contributed to 
31.8% and 11.1% of all instances respectively. Analysis of 
code elements revealed that some refactorings when applied 
led to the introduction  of new smells  that were not 
subsequently removed . As mentioned earlier, the reason for 
the lower percentage of positive refactorings may include the 
fact that no specific refactorings were applied for their 
corresponding code smells. In line with these results was the 
study conducted by Cedrim et al.  [45], which reported that 
out of the observed refactorings performed  in their study , 
only 9.7% successfully removed code smells.  
The results presented in Table 10 were generated using 
code smell detection methods that adhered to a tight 
threshold set which was comparable to the approach taken 
by Cedrim et al.  [45]. The thresholds for code smell detection 
were defined in [61][62]. Macia et al.  [61] validated the first 
set of code smell detection rules, called tight thresholds. This 
strategy is tight because it uses high thresholds to identify 
only crucial  code smells across projects. The second 
2989
530 4932643
438 407
0500100015002000250030003500
Neutral Negative Positive
Bavota Tight E. Edward  et al.: On the Impact of Refactorings on Software Attack Surface  
8 VOLUME XX, 20 24 
approach, referred to as relaxed, employs relaxed thresholds 
to identify as many code smells as possible. Moreover, we 
have also classified the refactorings using Bavota thresholds 
[55]. Figure 3 displays the distribution of the impact of 
refactorings on code smells, categorized as neutral, positive, 
and negative. The data is classified using three methods: 
Tight, Relaxed, and Bavota threshold.  An analysis in Figure 
3 demonstrates that th e proportion of neutral, positive, and 
negative refactorings is the same irrespective of the threshold 
used for code smell  detection.  
 
 
FIGURE 3.  The Impact of Refactorings on Code Smells.  
 
3) EFFECTS OF REFACTORINGS ON 
VULNERABILITIES  
The neutral impact of refactorings on vulnerabilities was the 
most frequent as depicted in Table 1 1. The analysis revealed 
that the neutral impact of refactorings on vulnerabilities was 
the most frequent accounting for 890 (89.2%) instances in 
the projects. We observed that Move Method , Extract 
Method , Rename Method,  Rename Class, Inline Method, Add 
Parameter , and Remove Parameter are the most applied 
refactorings with neutral impact accounting for  171 (90.5%), 
173 (96.6%), 144 (94.1%), 308 (82.8%), 57 (100 %), 34 
(75.6%), and 3 (100%) respectively. Nevertheless, it is 
important to highlight that 10.8% (108 out of 998 instances) 
of refactorings instances recorded negative effects on 
vulnerabilities, suggesting that certain refactorings might 
have introduced vulnerabilities into the source code of the 
examined projects. In line with these findings was the study 
by Iannone  et al.  [64] which found that refactorings can have 
negative and neutral effects on vulnerabilities. Similar 
findings were observed by Sultana et al. [65] that 
refactorings can have incidents that have negative and 
neutral effects on vulnerabilities.  The analysis presented in 
Table 1 1 was produced based on vulnerability detection 
strategies similar to the one used by Bavota et al. [55]. The 
findings of this study revealed that refactorings can have 
both neutral and negative effects on vulnerabilities.  
Surprisingly, no refactorings recorded the positive 
effects on vulnerabilities based on the analyzed  projects. 
This observation suggests that the specific refactorings 
employed in the analyzed  projects were not related to the 
reduction of the identified vulnerabilities.  For instance, the study by Nafees et al.  [66] revealed that Extract Method  
refactoring can address Cross -Site Scripting (XSS) 
vulnerabilities , however, this vulnerability was not among 
the identified vulnerabilities in the current study.  
Table 1 1: Effect of Refactoring s on Vulnerabilities  
Refactoring Type  Instances  Neutral  Negative  Positive  
Move Method  189 171(90.5%)  18(9.5%)  0(0%)  
Extract Method  179 173(96.6%)  6(3.4%)  0(0%)  
Rename Method  153 144(94.1%)  9(5.9%)  0(0%)  
Rename Class  372 308(82.8%)  64(17.2%)  0(0%)  
Inline Method  57 57(100%)  0(0%)  0(0%)  
Add Parameter  45 34(75.6%)  11(24.4%)  0(0%)  
Remove Parameter  3 3(100%)  0(0%)  0(0%)  
Pull Up Method  0 0(0%)  0(0%)  0(0%)  
Totals  998 890(89.2%)  108(10.8%)  0(0%)  
V. DISCUSSION  
This section contains a discussion of the implications our 
findings have on  (1) the identification of the software attack 
surface, (2) the identification of refactorings  applied , and (3) 
the impact of refactorings on the software attack surface of 
open -source software systems.  
A. IMPLICATIONS FOR ATTACK SURFACE 
IDENTIFICATION (RQ1)  
It has been revealed that the most occurring attack surface  
element  in the analyzed open -source software projects was 
code smells with a total of 18,303 (85.8%) instances 
followed by bugs which contributed to a total of 2,975 (14%) 
instances and last was vulnerabilities which contributed to 43 
(0.2%) of all instances . Moreover, t he prevalence and 
severity of attack surface  elements  in the selected projects 
vary, and it is important to recognize  this distinction. For 
example, code smells and bugs  are both prevalent software 
attack surface  elements  in the studied projects accounting for 
99.8% of all the attack surface  elements . Notably,  bugs, code 
smells and vulnerabilities contribute to software attack 
surface by providing potential entry points and opportunities 
for attackers to exploit flaws and cause harm to the software 
[67]. 
B. THE COMMON  APPLIED REFACTORINGS (RQ2)  
The results for RQ2 showed that  Extract Method, Inline 
Method, Move Method, Pull Up Method, Add Parameter, 
Remove Parameter, Rename Class, and Rename Method  are 
the most applied refactorings on the studied s oftware 
projects. These refactoring types are the most common and 
frequently studied by other researchers  as well [68][15][37]. 
As presented in Section IV (C), the Move Method  has been 
identified as the most frequently performed refactoring  
operation  with an occurrence of 1,174 ( 33.3%)  instances.  In 
line with these findings is  the study proposed by Kurbatova 
et al.  [69] which emphasized  that Move Method  refactoring 
2212
1232
4312112
1176
4112013
1122
388
05001000150020002500
Neutral Negative Positive
Relaxed Bavota TightE. Edward et al.: On the Impact of Refactorings on Software Attack Surface                                                                                           
is frequently employed due to its perceived effectiveness in 
addressing Feature Envy  code smell. The Extract Method  
was the second most common refactoring operation 
performed with 693 (19.7%) instances. This finding is 
similarly reported in  [55]. It is important to acknowledge 
that the relatively large number of Extract Method  
refactorings may lead to a correspondingly high number of 
Rename Method  refactorings. This observation was justified 
in the sense that Rename Method  and Rename Class  are the 
third  and fourth  most common refactoring activities 
performed with occurrences of 551(15.6%) and 521 (14.8%) 
respectively. Th ese results were also reported  by previous 
studies [22][47]. These refactorings were applied to make 
method and class  names  more meaningful to reflect their 
latest functions.  
C. THE IMPACT  OF REFACTORINGS ON SOFTWARE 
ATTACK SURFACE (RQ3)  
1) IMPACT OF REFACTORINGS ON BUGS  
The findings of this study suggest that refactorings can have 
multiple effects on bugs as they can be positive, negative, or 
neutral. It is worth noting that,  bugs had  two scenarios 
including the growing trend and the unchanging trend. The 
growing trend was observed for  Code complexity, incorrect 
data validation, and unused code  bugs . Whereas, the  
unchanging pattern  include d Memory leak and Unhandled 
exception  bugs . This signifies that th ese types  of bugs are 
difficult to fix by simple refactorings that were performed on 
the analyzed  projects. Yin et al.  [70] support these findings 
by stressing that among  the most difficult bugs to fix are 
Memory leak and Unhandled exception . Xuan  et al.  [71] 
noted that Memory leak and Unhandled exception  are the 
problematic bugs to be addressed by developers using 
refactorings.  
2) IMPACT OF REFACTORINGS ON CODE SMELLS  
The findings revealed that refactorings demonstrated 
positive, negative, and neutral effects on code smells.  These 
findings are consistent with the stud ies conducted in [55] and 
[72] which suggests that some refactorings decrease the 
number of code smell  instances, on the other hand , some 
refactorings may have no effects on code smells and some 
are likely  to introduce code smells . The findings of this study 
further confirm that in the course of the evolution of a 
software system, particular code smells may increase, 
decrease , or remain unchanged between subsequent 
version s. The first scenario that  showcased the growing trend 
of code smell  types  includes Comments, Duplicated Code, 
and Temporary Field . These findings were in line with the 
study by Counsell et al.  [48] which explored the eradication 
of code smells and the results revealed that Duplicated Code, 
Comments , and Temporary Field  code smells were not 
eradicated by any refactoring. According to the study , these 
smell types were categorized  as complex code smells and 
they are difficult to remove  through simple refactorings like 
the ones detected by the tools in this study. Wangberg [73] 
also supported these findings, documenting that Duplicated 
Code, Comments , and Temporary Field  smells are difficult to eliminate through simple refactorings and the same 
require complex refactorings , or in other words , composite 
refactorings.  
Other categories  of code smell s that showed  the 
unchanging trend include Long Method, Large class, and 
Feature Envy . This finding suggests  that the refactoring s that 
were  applied likely aimed to address other issues rather than 
just code smells . Noting that refactorings may be applied for 
different purposes including preparing the codebase when 
implementing new requirements [12]. Counsell et al.  [48] 
documented that Long Method, Large class, and Feature 
Envy  code smells require more instances of refactorings to 
be removed. The unchanging instances of this code  smell  
type imply  that some refactorings should be applied in a 
certain sequence  to be effective , for instance, according to 
Cedrim et al.   [45], Extract Method  should be followed by 
Move Method  to eliminate  the Long Method, and Feature 
Envy  code smells.  
3) IMPACT OF REFACTORINGS ON VULNERABILITIES  
The findings revealed that refactorings demonstrated only 
negative and neutral effects on the identified vulnerabilities. 
In line with these findings was the study by [64] which found 
that refactorings can have negative and neutral effects on 
vulnerabilities. According to the analysis in this study, there 
were no refactorings that positively impacted vulnerabilities.  
The premise could be the performed refactorings did not 
suffice to remove the identified vulnerabilities. However, we 
note that refactoring may have a positive impact on 
vulnerabilities as  the study by Nafees  et al.  [66] revealed that 
Extract Method  refactorings can address Cross -Site 
Scripting (XSS) vulnerabilities . Another similar observation 
by Shaw et al.  [74] documented that Extract Method and 
Move Method  refactorings can address overflow 
vulnerabilit ies. These vulnerabilities  were not included in  
this study . 
In conclusion, i t is important to note that the analysis in 
this study focused on the quantity of attack surface elements 
rather than examining how specific elements (e.g., a 
particular code smell) were affected by specific refactoring 
operations. Future research could provide deeper insights by 
analyzing , for example, how a specific refactoring type, such 
as Move Method , impacts its corresponding smell, like 
Feature Envy , and other types of smells. This detailed 
analysis would offer a better  understanding beyond just the 
quantity of instances. Notably, each refactoring operat ion 
typically addresses certain types of code smells and may 
have a neutral impact on others. This analysis could also be 
applied to bugs and vulnerabilities.  
VI. THREATS TO VALIDITY  
One of the major limitations of the study is the identification 
of software attack surface  elements . Detecting attack surface 
elements with only one tool limits the generalizability of our 
findings. To reduce the threat the software attack surface was 
identified using a widely recognized state -of-the-art tool 
namely SonarQube Community Edition . As a result, the 
scope of the study is restricted to the analysis of attack  E. Edward  et al.: On the Impact of Refactorings on Software Attack Surface  
8 VOLUME XX, 20 24 
surfaces identified by only one tool which  may pose a threat 
to the validity of the study, as any attack surface elements 
not identified by the tool were not part of the analysis .  
Moreover, the dataset utilized in this study comprises 
refactorings identified by PyRef and RefDiff. Consequently, 
any types of refactorings that were missed by these tools 
were not considered in the analysis . The second threat could 
stem from the fact that we quantitatively presented our 
findings by using the data produced by our classification 
strategies.  It is worth no ting that, different thresholds can 
produce entirely different outcomes. Hence, the selection of 
thresholds may present a challenge to the validity of this 
research. Hence, three different sets of thresholds were used  
to minimize this threat: tight, relaxed, and Bavota  thresholds  
[55]. These three strategies for attack surface detection  
enable us to establish classifications for refactoring based on 
three distinct sets of bugs, code smell, and vulnerability 
instances.  
VII. CONCLUSION  AND FUTURE WORK  
This paper presents an empirical study conducted on a 
dataset that includes 3,523 instances of refactorings, 18,303 
occurrences of code smells, 2,975 instances of bugs, and 43 
vulnerabilities found in 30 open -source projects written in 
Python, C, and JavaScript . These projects are part of a widely 
recognized  ecosystem, the GitHub repository. We initiated 
our research by conducting a preliminary analysis on the 
identification of the software attack surface and the 
previously applied refactorings in open -source software 
systems. Finally, we investigated the impact of refactorings 
on the software attack surface of the studied systems.  Several 
important conclusions are drawn from our study. Firstly, 
results indicated that  the most common attack surfaces on the 
studied open -source software projects are bugs, code smells , 
and vulnerabilities.  The study also found  that the common 
bugs were Code Complexity, Inconsistent Naming 
Convention, Insecure Code, Unused Code, Memory Leak 
and Unhandled Exception . Secondly , Extract Method, Inline 
Method, Move Method, Pull Up Method, Add Parameter, 
Remove Parameter, Rename Class, and Rename Method  are 
the most refactorings applied to the analyzed  open -source 
software projects . Thirdly,  we observed that refactorings can 
have multiple effects  (i.e., positive, negative, or neutral)  on 
bugs , vulnerabilities , and code smells .  
Potential avenues for further research include  
extending our study to a large sample of open -source 
software projects written in other programming languages 
such as Java, Ruby, Rust, and C# , and including  other 
elements of software attack surface  to better generalize our 
results. In addition , this study focused on the quantity of 
attack surface elements rather than how specific elements, 
like particular code smells, were impacted by specific 
refactoring operations. Future research could provide deeper 
insig hts by analyzing  how specific refactorings  affect their 
corresponding smells and other types of smells. This detailed 
approach could also be applied to studying the impact of 
refactorings on  bugs and vulnerabilities.  REFERENCES  
[1] E. L. G. Alves, M. Song, T. Massoni, P. D. L. MacHado, and M. 
Kim, “Refactoring Inspection Support for Manual Refactoring 
Edits,” IEEE Trans. Softw. Eng. , vol. 44, no. 4, pp. 365 –383, 
2018, doi: 10.1109/TSE.2017.2679742.  
[2] M. Fowler and K. Beck, Refactoring Improving the Design of 
Existing Code Second Edition , Second Edi. New York: Pearson 
Education Limited, 2019.  
[3] S. Rochimah, S. Arifiani, and V. F. Insanittaqwa, “Non -source 
code refactoring: A systematic literature review,” Int. J. Softw. 
Eng. its Appl. , vol. 9, no. 6, pp. 197 –214, 2015, doi: 
10.14257/ijseia.2015.9.6.19.  
[4] H. Mumtaz, M. Alshayeb, S. Mahmood, and M. Niazi, “An 
empirical study to improve software security through the 
application of code refactoring,” Inf. Softw. Technol. , vol. 96, pp. 
112–125, 2018, doi: 10.1016/j.infsof.2017.11.010.  
[5] S. Ruland, G. Kulcsár, E. Leblebici, S. Peldszus, and M. Lochau, 
Controlling the Attack Surface of Object -Oriented Refactorings 
Controlling the Attack Surface of Object -Oriented Refactorings , 
no. January. Springer International Publishing, 2018.  
[6] B. Alshammari, C. Fidge, and D. Corney, “Assessing the impact 
of refactoring on security -critical object -oriented designs,” Proc. 
- Asia-Pacific Softw. Eng. Conf. APSEC , pp. 186 –195, 2010, doi: 
10.1109/APSEC.2010.30.  
[7] S. H. Kannangara and W. M. J. I. Wijayanayake, “An emprical 
ecvaluation of impact of refactoring on internal and extenal 
measures of code quality,” vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 51 –67, 2015.  
[8] A. Jonsson, “The Impact of Refactoring Legacy Systems on Code 
Quality Metrics,” 2017, [Online]. Available: 
http://urn.kb.se/resolve?urn=urn:nbn:se:uu:diva -
325433%0Ahttp://www.diva -
portal.se/smash/get/diva2:1114582/FULLTEXT01.pdf.  
[9] C. Abid, M. Kessentini, V. Alizadeh, M. Dhaouadi, and R. 
Kazman, “How Does Refactoring Impact Security When 
Improving Quality? A Security -Aware Refactoring Approach,” 
IEEE Trans. Softw. Eng. , vol. 48, no. 3, pp. 864 –878, 2018, doi: 
10.1109/TSE.2020.3005995.  
[10] S. F. Smith and M. Thober, “Refactoring programs to secure 
information flows,” PLAS 2006 - Proc. 2006 Program. Lang. 
Anal. Secur. Work. , vol. 2006, pp. 75 –84, 2006, doi: 
10.1145/1134744.1134758.  
[11] G. Soares, B. Catão, C. Varjão, S. Aguiar, R. Gheyi, and T. 
Massoni, “Analyzing refactorings on software repositories,” 
Proc. - 25th Brazilian Symp. Softw. Eng. SBES 2011 , no. 
September, pp. 164 –173, 2011, doi: 10.1109/SBES.2011.21.  
[12] A. S. Nyamawe, H. Liu, N. Niu, Q. Umer, and Z. Niu, “Automated 
recommendation of software refactorings based on feature 
requests,” Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Requir. Eng. , vol. 2019 -Septe, 
pp. 187 –198, 2019, doi: 10.1109/RE.2019.00029.  
[13] E. A. Alomar, M. W. Mkaouer, A. Ouni, and M. Kessentini, “On 
the Impact of Refactoring on the Relationship between Quality 
Attributes and Design Metrics,” Int. Symp. Empir. Softw. Eng. 
Meas. , vol. 2019 -Septe, pp. 1 –11, 2019, doi: 
10.1109/ESEM.2019.8870177.  
[14] A. Almogahed, M. Omar, N. H. Zakaria, G. Muhammad, and S. 
A. AlQahtani, “Revisiting Scenarios of Using Refactoring 
Techniques to Improve Software Systems Quality,” IEEE Access , 
vol. PP, p. 1, 2022, doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2022.3218007.  
[15] A. S. Nyamawe, “Requirements?Driven Recommendation of 
Software Refactoring,” Beijing Institute ofTechnology, 2020.  
[16] C. Abid, D. E. Rzig, T. Ferreira, M. Kessentini, and T. Sharma, 
“Explainable Search -Based Refactoring,” vol. 14, no. 8, pp. 1 –18, 
2020, [Online]. Available: https://pandas.pydata.org/pandas -
docs/stable/reference/index.html.  
[17] M. Siavvas, E. Gelenbe, and D. Kehagias, Static Analysis -Based 
Approaches , vol. 2. Springer International Publishing, 2018.  
[18] W. F. Opdyke, “Refactoring: A program restructuring aid in 
designing object -oriented application frameworks,” Univ. Illinois 
Urbana -Champaign , p. 206, 1992.  
[19] A. Kaur and M. Kaur, “Analysis of Code Refactoring Impact on 
Software Quality,” MATEC Web Conf. , vol. 57, 2016, doi: 
10.1051/matecconf/20165702012.  E. Edward et al.: On the Impact of Refactorings on Software Attack Surface                                                                                           
[20] S. Thompson and H. Li, “Refactoring tools for functional 
languages,” J. Funct. Program. , vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 293 –350, 2013, 
doi: 10.1017/S0956796813000117.  
[21] E. Murphy -hill and A. P. Black, “Refactoring Tools: Fitness for 
Purpose,” vol. 5, no. 25, pp. 38 –44, 2008.  
[22] E. Murphy -Hill, C. Parnin, and A. P. Black, “How we refactor, 
and how we know it,” IEEE Trans. Softw. Eng. , vol. 38, no. 1, pp. 
5–18, 2012, doi: 10.1109/TSE.2011.41.  
[23] H. Atwi, “PyRef: A Refactoring Detection Tool For Python 
Projects,” no. June, 2021.  
[24] I. H. Moghadam, M. O. Cinneide, F. Zarepour, and M. A. 
Jahanmir, “RefDetect: A Multi -Language Refactoring Detection 
Tool Based on String Alignment,” IEEE Access , vol. 9, pp. 
86698 –86727, 2021, doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2021.3086689.  
[25] L. Tan and C. Bockisch, “A Survey of Refactoring Detection 
Tools,” CEUR Workshop Proc. , vol. 2308, pp. 100 –105, 2019.  
[26] N. Tsantalis, M. Mansouri, L. M. Eshkevari, D. Mazinanian, and 
D. Dig, “Accurate and Efficient Refactoring Detection in Commit 
History,” Proc. - Int. Conf. Softw. Eng. , vol. 2018 -Janua, pp. 483 –
494, 2018, doi: 10.1145/3180155.3180206.  
[27] Open Web Application Security Project, “Attack Surface 
Analysis Cheat Sheet,” 2013. 
https://web.archive.org/web/20161223133056/https://www.owas
p.org/index.php?title=Attack_Surface_Analysis_Cheat_Sheet&o
ldid=156006 (accessed Jan. 27, 2023).  
[28] A. Ikegami et al. , On the Use of Refactoring in Security 
Vulnerability Fixes: An Exploratory Study on Maven Libraries , 
vol. 1, no. 1. Association for Computing Machinery, 2022.  
[29] HackerOne, “The Attack Surface and How to Analyze , Manage , 
and Reduce It What is an Attack Surface ? Attack Vectors and 
Their Relation to Attack Surfaces What is Attack Surface 
Analysis and Monitoring ?,” 2023. 
https://www.hackerone.com/knowledge -center/attack -surface -
and-how-analyze -manage -and-reduce -it (accessed Mar. 23, 
2023).  
[30] A. Kurmus, A. Sorniotti, and R. Kapitza, “Attack surface 
reduction for commodity OS kernels,” pp. 1 –6, 2011, doi: 
10.1145/1972551.1972557.  
[31] C. Theisen, K. Herzig, P. Morrison, B. Murphy, and L. Williams, 
“Approximating Attack Surfaces with Stack Traces,” Proc. - Int. 
Conf. Softw. Eng. , vol. 2, pp. 199 –208, 2015, doi: 
10.1109/ICSE.2015.148.  
[32] J. Szefer, E. Keller, R. B. Lee, and J. Rexford, “Eliminating the 
Hypervisor Attack Surface.pdf,” 2011.  
[33] S. Alraddadi, “Detecting Security Bad Smells of Software by 
using Data Mining,” pp. 0 –27, 2023.  
[34] A. S. Balaaji, J. Gowtham, B. Amirtharaj, and B. A. B, 
“IDENTIFING SOFTWARE BUGS OR NOT USING SMLT 
MODEL,” no. 06, pp. 868 –878, 2022.  
[35] G. Rodríguez -Pérez, G. Robles, A. Serebrenik, A. Zaidman, D. 
M. Germán, and J. M. Gonzalez -Barahona, “How bugs are born: 
a model to identify how bugs are introduced in software 
components,” Empir. Softw. Eng. , vol. 25, no. 2, pp. 1294 –1340, 
2020, doi: 10.1007/s10664 -019-09781 -y. 
[36] S. Shafiq, W. Assuncao, A. Mashkoor, C. Mayr -Dorn, and A. 
Egyed, “Towards Recommending Refactoring Operations Based 
on Bugs,” vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 14 –21, 2020.  
[37] A. Almogahed, M. Omar, and N. H. Zakaria, “Refactoring Codes 
to Improve Software Security Requirements,” Procedia Comput. 
Sci., vol. 204, no. September, pp. 108 –115, 2022, doi: 
10.1016/j.procs.2022.08.013.  
[38] D. A. Da Costa, S. McIntosh, W. Shang, U. Kulesza, R. Coelho, 
and A. E. Hassan, “A Framework for Evaluating the Results of 
the SZZ Approach for Identifying Bug -Introducing Changes,” 
IEEE Trans. Softw. Eng. , vol. 43, no. 7, pp. 641 –657, 2017, doi: 
10.1109/TSE.2016.2616306.  
[39] D. Gigante, F. Pecorelli, V. S. Barletta, A. Janes, and V. 
Lenarduzzi, “Resolving Security Issues via Quality -Oriented 
Refactoring : A User Study,” no. February, 2023.  
[40] I. Ferreira et al. , “Poster: The buggy side of code refactoring: 
Understanding the relationship between refactorings and bugs,” 
Proc. - Int. Conf. Softw. Eng. , no. June, pp. 406 –407, 2018, doi: 10.1145/3183440.3195030.  
[41] O. Hamdi, A. Ouni, E. A. Alomar, M. O Cinneide, and M. W. 
Mkaouer, “A longitudinal study of the impact of refactoring in 
android applications,” Proc. - 2021 IEEE/ACM 8th Int. Conf. 
Mob. Softw. Eng. Syst. MobileSoft 2021 , vol. 140, no. June, pp. 
28–39, 2021, doi: 10.1109/MobileSoft52590.2021.00010.  
[42] W. J. Brown, R. C. Malveau, T. J. Mowbray, and J. Wiley, 
AntiPatterns: Refactoring Software , Architectures, and Projects 
in Crisis , vol. 3, no. 4. New York: John Wiley & Sons, Inc, 1998.  
[43] F. Palomba, G. Bavota, M. Di Penta, F. Fasano, R. Oliveto, and 
A. De Lucia, “On the diffuseness and the impact on 
maintainability of code smells: a large scale empirical 
investigation,” Empir. Softw. Eng. , vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 1188 –1221, 
2018, doi: 10.1007/s10664 -017-9535 -z. 
[44] A. C. Bibiano et al. , “Look Ahead! Revealing Complete 
Composite Refactorings and their Smelliness Effects,” Proc. - 
2021 IEEE Int. Conf. Softw. Maint. Evol. ICSME 2021 , no. June, 
pp. 298 –308, 2021, doi: 10.1109/ICSME52107.2021.00033.  
[45] D. Cedrim et al. , “Understanding the impact of refactoring on 
smells: A longitudinal study of 23 software projects,” Proc. ACM 
SIGSOFT Symp. Found. Softw. Eng. , vol. Part F1301, no. August, 
pp. 465 –475, 2017, doi: 10.1145/3106237.3106259.  
[46] N. Yoshida, T. Saika, E. Choi, A. Ouni, and K. Inoue, “Revisiting 
the relationship between code smells and refactoring,” IEEE Int. 
Conf. Progr. Compr. , vol. 2016 -July, pp. 1 –4, 2016, doi: 
10.1109/ICPC.2016.7503738.  
[47] R. Halepmollas and A. Tosun, “Exploring the Relationship 
Between Refactoring and Code Debt Indicators,” no. May, 2022, 
doi: 10.1002/smr.2447.  
[48] S. Counsell, R. M. Hierons, H. Hamza, S. Black, and M. Durrand, 
“Exploring the Eradication of Code Smells: An Empirical and 
Theoretical Perspective,” Adv. Softw. Eng. , vol. 2010, pp. 1 –12, 
2010, doi: 10.1155/2010/820103.  
[49] M. Shahzad, M. Z. Shafiq, and A. X. Liu, “A large scale 
exploratory analysis of software vulnerability life cycles,” Proc. - 
Int. Conf. Softw. Eng. , pp. 771 –781, 2012, doi: 
10.1109/ICSE.2012.6227141.  
[50] A. O. Bang, U. P. Rao, A. Visconti, A. Brighente, and M. Conti, 
“An IoT Inventory Before Deployment: A Survey on IoT 
Protocols, Communication Technologies, Vulnerabilities, 
Attacks, and Future Research Directions,” Comput. Secur. , vol. 
123, p. 102914, 2022, doi: 10.1016/j.cose.2022.102914.  
[51] New Relic, “Modernizing with AWS : Getting Started with,” no. 
White paper, p. 12, 2020, [Online]. Available: 
https://newrelic.com/sites/default/files/2021 -08/modernizing -
with-aws-refactoring.pdf.  
[52] Y. Zhao, R. Liang, X. Chen, and J. Zou, “Evaluation indicators 
for open -source software: a review,” Cybersecurity , vol. 4, no. 1, 
2021, doi: 10.1186/s42400 -021-00084 -8. 
[53] D. Silva and M. T. Valente, “RefDiff: Detecting Refactorings in 
Version Histories,” IEEE Int. Work. Conf. Min. Softw. Repos. , pp. 
269–279, 2017, doi: 10.1109/MSR.2017.14.  
[54] SonarQube, “No Title,” Documentation , 2023. 
https://pmpl.cs.ui.ac.id/sonarqube/documentation/user -
guide/security -hotspots/ (accessed Jul. 04, 2023).  
[55] G. Bavota, B. De Carluccio, A. De Lucia, M. Di Penta, R. Oliveto, 
and O. Strollo, “When does a refactoring induce bugs? An 
empirical study,” Proc. - 2012 IEEE 12th Int. Work. Conf. Source 
Code Anal. Manip. SCAM 2012 , pp. 104 –113, 2012, doi: 
10.1109/SCAM.2012.20.  
[56] R. S. Menshawy, A. H. Yousef, and A. Salem, “Code Smells and 
Detection Techniques: A Survey,” 2021 Int. Mobile, Intelligent, 
Ubiquitous Comput. Conf. MIUCC 2021 , pp. 78 –83, 2021, doi: 
10.1109/MIUCC52538.2021.9447669.  
[57] B. Sotto -Mayor, A. Elmishali, M. Kalech, and R. Abreu, 
“Exploring Design smells for smell -based defect prediction,” 
Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence , vol. 115. 
2022, doi: 10.1016/j.engappai.2022.105240.  
[58] MITRE, “CWE VIEW: Weaknesses in OWASP Top Ten (2021),” 
Common Weakness Enumeration , 2021. 
https://cwe.mitre.org/data/definitions/1344.html (accessed Sep. 
09, 2023).   E. Edward  et al.: On the Impact of Refactorings on Software Attack Surface  
8 VOLUME XX, 20 24 
[59] C. Sharma and S. C. Jain, “Analysis and classification of SQL 
injection vulnerabilities and attacks on web applications,” 2014 
Int. Conf. Adv. Eng. Technol. Res. ICAETR 2014 , 2014, doi: 
10.1109/ICAETR.2014.7012815.  
[60] P. Ladisa, H. Plate, M. Martinez, and O. Barais, “Taxonomy of 
Attacks on Open -Source Software Supply Chains,” pp. 1 –18, 
2022, [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/2204.04008.  
[61] I. Macia, R. Arcoverde, A. Garcia, C. Chavez, and A. Von Staa, 
“On the relevance of code anomalies for identifying architecture 
degradation symptoms,” Proc. Eur. Conf. Softw. Maint. 
Reengineering, CSMR , pp. 277 –286, 2012, doi: 
10.1109/CSMR.2012.35.  
[62] I. Macia, A. Garcia, C. Chavez, and A. Von Staa, “Enhancing the 
detection of code anomalies with architecture -sensitive 
strategies,” Proc. Eur. Conf. Softw. Maint. Reengineering, CSMR , 
pp. 177 –186, 2013, doi: 10.1109/CSMR.2013.27.  
[63] C. Vassallo, G. Grano, F. Palomba, H. C. Gall, and A. Bacchelli, 
“A large -scale empirical exploration on refactoring activities in 
open source software projects,” Sci. Comput. Program. , vol. 180, 
no. 1, pp. 1 –15, 2019, doi: 10.1016/j.scico.2019.05.002.  
[64] E. Iannone, Z. Codabux, V. Lenarduzzi, and F. Palomba, 
“Rubbing Salt in The Wound ? A Large -Scale Investigation into 
The Effects of Refactoring on Security into The Effects of 
Refactoring on Security,” no. January, 2020.  
[65] K. Z. Sultana, Z. Codabux, and B. Williams, “Examining the 
relationship of code and architectural smells with software 
vulnerabilities,” Proc. - Asia-Pacific Softw. Eng. Conf. APSEC , 
vol. 2020 -Decem, pp. 31 –40, 2020, doi: 
10.1109/APSEC51365.2020.00011.  
[66] T. Nafees, N. Coull, I. Ferguson, and A. Sampson, “Vulnerability 
Anti-Patterns: A Timeless Way to Capture Poor Software 
Practices (Vulnerabilities),” Proc. 24th Conf. Pattern Lang. 
Programs , pp. 1 –16, 2017.  
[67] P. Gadient, M. Ghafari, P. Frischknecht, and O. Nierstrasz, 
Security code smells in Android ICC , vol. 24, no. 5. Empirical 
Software Engineering, 2019.  
[68] B. Alshammari, C. Fidge, and D. Corney, “Security assessment of 
code refactoring rules,” WIAR 2012 - Natl. Work. Inf. Assur. Res. 
Proc. , pp. 65 –74, 2012.  
[69] Z. Kurbatova, I. Veselov, Y. Golubev, and T. Bryksin, 
“Recommendation of Move Method Refactoring Using Path -
Based Representation of Code,” Proc. - 2020 IEEE/ACM 42nd 
Int. Conf. Softw. Eng. Work. ICSEW 2020 , pp. 315 –322, 2020, 
doi: 10.1145/3387940.3392191.  
[70] Z. Yin, D. Yuan, Y. Zhou, S. Pasupathy, and L. Bairavasundaram, 
“How do fixes become bugs?,” pp. 26 –36, 2011, doi: 
10.1145/2025113.2025121.  
[71] X. Xuan, X. Zhao, Y. Wang, and S. Li, “An empirical study of 
bugs in industrial financial systems,” IEICE Trans. Inf. Syst. , vol. 
E98D, no. 12, pp. 2322 –2327, 2015, doi: 
10.1587/transinf.2015EDL8084.  
[72] G. Bavota, A. De Lucia, M. Di Penta, R. Oliveto, and F. Palomba, 
“An experimental investigation on the innate relationship between 
quality and refactoring,” J. Syst. Softw. , vol. 107, no. January 
2018, pp. 1 –14, 2015, doi: 10.1016/j.jss.2015.05.024.  
[73] R. D. Wangberg, “A Literature Review on Code Smells and 
Refactoring,” University of Oslo, 2010.  
[74] A. Shaw, D. Doggett, and M. Hafiz, “Automatically fixing C 
buffer overflows using program transformations,” Proc. Int. Conf. 
Dependable Syst. Networks , pp. 124 –135, 2014, doi: 
10.1109/DSN.2014.25.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  ESTOMII EDWARD  received his Advanced 
Diploma in Computer Science from the Institute 
of Finance Management, Tanzania, in 2009. He is 
currently pursuing a Master’s degree with the 
College of Informatics and Virtual Education, The 
University of Dodoma, Tanzania. He is currently 
working at the Tanzania Commission for 
Universities, Tanzania , as a Quality Assurance 
Officer. His research interests include software 
refactoring, requirements engineering, software evolution, and software 
quality.  
 
ALLY S. NYAMAWE , is a Senior Lecturer of 
Computer Science at the University of 
Dodoma, Tanzania. He obtained a BSc in 
Computer Science from the University of Dar 
es Salaam in 2008, an MSc in Computer 
Science from the University of Dodoma in 
2011, and a Ph.D degree in Com puter Science 
and Technology from the Beijing Institute of 
Technology, China in 2020. Nyamawe has 
significant research experience in applying  Artificial Intelligence in  
Software Engineering. His research interests include Software 
Refacto ring, Machine Learning, and Requirements Engineering . He has 
served on the program committees for prestigious conferences 
including the 37th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated 
Software Engineering and the 11th International Workshop on Software 
and Systems Traceability.  His recent recognition includes a 2022 
recipient of the Seed Grant for New African Principal Investigators 
awarded by The World Academy of Sciences under UNESCO funding.  
 
NOE ELISA  currently serves as the acting 
Director of ICT at the University of Dodoma. He 
is an experienced cybersecurity, Artificial 
Intelligence (AI), and data science 
researcher/engineer, boasting over eleven (11) 
years of experience in telecommunication, 
network ing, software, and web applications 
security. He specializes in the design and 
implementation of AI models, particularly for 
detecting anomalies in computer networks. Additionally, he has expertise in 
using blockchain technology to develop secure and privacy -preserving 
decentralized systems. His PhD research at Northumbria University, UK, 
focused on exploiting blockchain technology and Artificial Immune 
Systems (AIS) to create a decentralized, secure, and privacy -preserving e -
Government system for enforcing data protection and trust. During his 
master's degree studies in India in 2014, he received professional training in 
ethical hacking, Linux server administration, Android mobile application 
development, CCNA, and web application programming in JA VA. One of 
his notable contributions to AI and academic research is the development of 
a new general -purpose multi -class classifier based on the Dendritic Cell 
Algorithm (McDCA), which is currently under review by the IEEE 
Transactions on Neural Networks a nd Learning Systems journal. His current 
research and practical endeavors focus on leveraging African -origin datasets 
to develop AI -powered solutions that address privacy concerns related to 
data breaches and unlawful access to personal information.   
 
 
