Academic Editor: Paolo Bellavista
Received: 10 January 2026
Revised: 15 February 2026
Accepted: 18 February 2026
Published: 2 April 2026
Copyright: © 2026 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license.
Article
Toward a Unified Framework for Secure Coding:
A Comprehensive Synthesis of Best Practices
Alyah Alromaizan1, Ghala Alzahrani1, Aliza Khan1, Lulwah Alhumaid1, Md Kamrul Siam2,*
,
Muhammad Umair Khan1
, Md Jobair Hossain Faruk3,*
and Hossain Shahriar4
1Department of Software Engineering, Alfaisal University, Riyadh 11533, Saudi Arabia;
mumkhan@alfaisal.edu (M.U.K.)
2Department of Computer Science, New York Institute of Technology, New York, NY 10023, USA
3Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Central Arkansas, Conway, AR 72035, USA
4Center for Cybersecurity, University of West Florida, Pensacola, FL 32514, USA
*Correspondence: ksiam01@nyit.edu (M.K.S.); mhossainfaruk@uca.edu (M.J.H.F.)
Abstract
The challenge of software vulnerabilities persists globally, despite the widespread avail-
ability of advanced security tools and comprehensive developer guidelines. This issue is
not the result of professional negligence, but rather the complex and non-intuitive nature
of secure coding. This research takes on the massive data silos in the security industry by
providing a comprehensive review of best practices drawn from 35 reputable academic
and corporate sources. Authentication, cryptography, input validation, and deployment
hardening are some of the key development domains into which these technologies are
organized. We conduct a comprehensive analysis of each practice, elucidating the specific
security issue it addresses, prevalent implementation patterns, and potential hazards, in
addition to serving as a checklist. Simple precautions, like not using passwords that are
hardcoded, and more involved methods, such correctly encoding output and configuring
access controls effectively, are all part of the range of practices. We assert that despite the
prevalent usage of tools like as static analyzers, numerous vulnerabilities persist due to
developers’ insufficient training in integrating security considerations into their coding
practices. This work aspires to serve as a comprehensive, organized resource that supplies
developers with the necessary context and guidance to make informed, security-oriented
decisions along the software development lifecycle. The aim is to develop a more extensive
resource than those presently accessible, which can also assist educators or security teams
during code instruction or evaluation.
Keywords: secure coding; software vulnerabilities; software security; static analysis; secure
development practices
1. Introduction
Contemporary software development is characterized by hyper-connected architec-
tures and accelerated delivery cycles. While this environment fosters rapid innovation,
it simultaneously expands the attack surface of modern systems, leading to a prolifera-
tion of security breaches that are increasingly sophisticated yet often rooted in avoidable
flaws [ 1]. Despite the maturation of the cybersecurity field, a critical paradox remains:
security vulnerabilities persist at an alarming rate, frequently arising from recurring and
foreseeable programming errors that theoretically should have been mitigated by existing
standards [ 2,3]. Notwithstanding the extensive guidance provided by industry authorities
Computers 2026 ,15, 220 https://doi.org/10.3390/computers15040220Computers 2026 ,15, 220 2 of 26
such as the Open Web Application Security Project (OWASP) and the Computer Emergency
Response Team (CERT), insecure code continues to infiltrate production environments,
highlighting a fundamental breakdown in the translation of security theory into develop-
ment practice [4,5].
A fundamental barrier to the reliable development of secure software is the fragmen-
tation and systemic inconsistencies of available knowledge. Secure coding principles are
presently scattered throughout numerous pages of varied material, frequently exhibit-
ing inconsistent wording or conflicting advice. This fragmentation imposes a significant
cognitive burden on developers, who must manage the technical intricacies of CERT, the
administrative stipulations of the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST),
and the web-oriented emphasis of OWASP [ 6,7]. This complexity causes many teams, espe-
cially those without dedicated security specialists, to rely on ad hoc guidance or outdated
online resources, which leads to seasoned professionals making critical mistakes despite
their best efforts [8,9].
This paper addresses this “Usability Paradox” by providing a comprehensive archi-
tectural synthesis of secure coding principles. While the individual concepts within this
framework may be conceptually recognized by experienced practitioners, the scholarly
novelty of this work lies in its multidisciplinary standardization. By meticulously distilling
insights from over 35 authoritative academic and industrial sources, we establish a unified,
language-agnostic taxonomy that bridges the “Actionability Gap”—the distance between
theoretical knowledge of a vulnerability and the proactive design logic required to prevent
it [10].
Rather than functioning as a mere checklist, this research offers an analytical, practice-
by-practice examination that elucidates the causal links between defensive coding and
vulnerability mitigation. We emphasize that while automated tools such as Static Applica-
tion Security Testing (SAST) are essential, they are frequently limited by a lack of contextual
awareness regarding business logic. Our framework, therefore, seeks to democratize spe-
cialized security expertise, making the defensive insights of seasoned security engineers
accessible to generalist developers and students who lack the luxury of mastering multiple
fragmented standards.
The resulting structured resource is organized into eight primary functional domains,
specifically engineered to assist educators, security leads, and developers in the instruction,
implementation, and evaluation of resilient software. By shifting the focus from reactive
patching to a proactive, habituated design philosophy, this work provides the foundational
context necessary for informed, security-aware decision-making throughout the Software
Development Lifecycle (SDLC).
2. Related Work
The landscape of secure coding is shaped by a continuous dialogue between aca-
demic researchers, regulatory bodies, and industry practitioners. Historically, foundational
guidance has been provided by organizations such as the OWASP and the CERT. These
entities have established rigorous taxonomies for identifying vulnerabilities and provid-
ing language-specific countermeasures, particularly in the realms of input validation and
memory safety [ 11]. Furthermore, the NIST provides the administrative and regulatory
backbone for secure systems through frameworks like SP 800-63B [12].
However, a critical evaluation of these resources reveals a significant usability paradox:
as the technical depth of standards increases, their accessibility to the generalist developer
decreases. While NIST offers high-level policy and CERT provides low-level syntax, there
is a distinct lack of a “middle-tier” framework that translates these into architectural design
logic suitable for the modern SDLC [7].
https://doi.org/10.3390/computers15040220Computers 2026 ,15, 220 3 of 26
2.1. The Human Element: Cognitive and Cultural Constraints
Academic inquiry into the human factors of software security reveals that technical
failures are often symptomatic of systemic organizational challenges [ 13]. Research by
Gasiba et al. has been instrumental in demonstrating that security non-compliance is
rarely a product of negligence; rather, it is a response to the cognitive load imposed by
high-pressure environments and ambiguous guidelines [ 14,15]. Similarly, Lopez et al.
identified the phenomenon of “responsibility diffusion,” where developers in large-scale
teams operate under the assumption that security is a downstream concern handled by
specialized auditors [16].
These studies contribute the essential understanding that secure coding is not
merely a technical problem but a behavioral one. Our framework builds upon these
insights by specifically designing a structure intended to reduce cognitive load through
functional categorization.
2.2. The Paradigmatic Shift Toward AI-Assisted Development
The recent proliferation of Large Language Models (LLMs), such as GitHub Copilot,
has fundamentally altered the developer’s workflow [ 17,18]. While these tools offer gains
in velocity, they introduce a paradoxical security risk. Pearce et al. and Perry et al. have
provided seminal evidence that developers may develop an over-reliance on AI-generated
snippets, which often replicate known vulnerabilities found in training data [ 19–21]. This
“black box” nature of AI-generated code necessitates a shift back to foundational principles,
where the human developer acts as the final security gatekeeper.
2.3. The Identified Research Gap
Notwithstanding the abundant research, we recognize three pivotal gaps that this
study intends to address:
1. Fragmentation Gap: Existing standards are siloed. A developer must consult mul-
tiple, non-aligned sources to cover both web-specific (OWASP) and systems-level
(CERT) security.
2. Language Dependency Gap: Most rigorous guides are tied to specific languages
(e.g., C++ or Java), leaving a void for developers working in polyglot environments
or using emerging frameworks.
3. Actionability Gap: High-level frameworks (NIST) describe what to achieve but not
how to code it, while low-level guides (CWE) describe what went wrong but not the
proactive design pattern to prevent it.
2.4. Comparative Synthesis and Principal Contributions
The primary contribution of this research lies in its transition from a vulnerability-
centric approach to a functional synthesis. Table 1 provides a critical comparison, delineat-
ing the positioning of our framework against established standards.
By consolidating more than 35 authoritative sources, this manuscript offers an ana-
lytical framework that addresses the underlying logic of secure software construction. It
moves beyond the “checklist” model to provide a mental model for developers, filling the
aforementioned gaps by providing a unified, language-agnostic, and proactive guide.
https://doi.org/10.3390/computers15040220Computers 2026 ,15, 220 4 of 26
Table 1. Critical Comparison: Situating the Proposed Framework within the Literature.
FeatureOWASP Top
TenCERT
StandardsNIST SP 800-53Proposed
Framework
Primary
ObjectiveVulnerability
EnumerationSyntax-Level
ComplianceAdministrative
ControlArchitectural
Synthesis
MethodologyIncident-Driven
(Reactive)Rule-Driven
(Corrective)Policy-Driven
(Regulatory)Synthesis-
Driven
(Proactive)
Target AudienceSecurity
AuditorsSystems
EngineersCompliance
OfficersGeneralist
Developers
Language ScopeWeb-Centric
(Mostly)Language
SpecificPlatform
AgnosticLanguage
Agnostic
Principal LogicMitigation of
known flawsAdherence to
syntaxOrganizational
postureSecurity-by-
Design logic
3. Methodology
In this study, we sought to compile and synthesize secure coding practices from a
wide range of academic, industrial, and standards-based sources to create a unified and
structured framework. Given the fragmented nature of the existing literature, we adopted
a transparent and systematic methodology to identify, select, and filter the sources. This
section outlines the process by which the sources were compiled and the rationale for
their selection.
3.1. Databases Consulted
We consulted several reputable databases, including:
• IEEE Xplore: for peer-reviewed articles and conference papers.
• ACM Digital Library: for a wide range of software engineering research papers.
• Google Scholar: to broaden the scope of academic articles.
• OWASP , CERT, and NIST: for industry standards and secure coding guidelines.
3.2. Search Strategy
The search strategy included keywords such as “secure coding practices,” “vulnerabil-
ities,” “software security,” “best practices for secure development,” and “coding standards.”
Articles published between 2010 and 2025 were prioritized to ensure the inclusion of the
most recent and relevant materials.
3.3. Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria
To ensure the inclusion of only the most relevant and credible sources:
• Inclusion Criteria: Peer-reviewed articles, industry guidelines from recognized organi-
zations (e.g., OWASP , CERT), and government publications (e.g., NIST) focused on
actionable secure coding practices applicable to a wide range of software development.
• Exclusion Criteria: Sources that were outdated (published before 2010), highly special-
ized or domain-specific (e.g., focusing on a single programming language), or that did
not present practical, actionable secure coding practices.
3.4. Rationale for Final Selection
The selected sources were chosen for their relevance to real-world software develop-
ment practices and their credibility within the field. We prioritized resources that provided
concrete examples, case studies, and well-established guidelines that developers could
directly apply to their workflows. This synthesis of over 35 credible sources from academia
https://doi.org/10.3390/computers15040220Computers 2026 ,15, 220 5 of 26
and industry ensures that the resulting framework addresses a broad spectrum of secure
coding challenges.
3.5. Positioning as Narrative Synthesis
This paper is positioned as a narrative synthesis rather than a full systematic literature
review. We synthesized practices from a variety of sources based on their relevance to the
field, and we grouped similar practices into thematic categories to provide a comprehensive
resource. While not exhaustive, this approach ensures that the selected practices are well-
rounded, actionable, and applicable across various software development contexts. The
transparent selection process helps minimize potential selection bias and provides sufficient
detail for reproducibility.
3.6. Introduction to Categorization Framework Design
To illustrate how secure coding practices were synthesized and categorized, we pro-
vide a visual representation of the categorization framework. The framework organizes the
practices into eight major domains, each corresponding to different aspects of the software
development lifecycle. This structure allows for an intuitive and practical application of the
practices, ensuring that developers can easily navigate the best practices and understand
how they relate to one another. The overall structure of the synthesized domains and their
relationships is illustrated in Figure 1, which provides a visual overview of the proposed
categorization framework.
Figure 1. Design of Categorization Framework for Secure Coding Practices.
4. Categorization Framework
We introduce a comprehensive categorization framework for secure coding practices,
structured into eight distinct domains, each addressing key aspects of software security.
These domains were specifically chosen to address critical aspects of secure software
development, ensuring that developers have a clear and navigable set of practices to follow.
The structure allows for an easy understanding and application of these practices across
different stages of the software development lifecycle.
4.1. Design Rationale Behind the Categorization Framework
The categorization framework consists of eight primary domains, designed to provide
a comprehensive approach to secure coding practices. While the structure is intuitively
https://doi.org/10.3390/computers15040220Computers 2026 ,15, 220 6 of 26
organized, the framework’s design requires a solid theoretical grounding to ensure its
relevance within the broader context of security models. To provide this foundation, we
explicitly align our framework with several established security models.
4.1.1. Relation to Secure SDLC (Software Development Life Cycle)
Our framework aligns with the Secure SDLC, which advocates integrating security at
each phase of the development lifecycle. While Secure SDLC outlines the stages including
design, development, testing, and deployment, our framework focuses on actionable
security practices that developers can follow during these phases. By complementing
Secure SDLC, our framework ensures that security is a continuous and evolving focus
throughout the software development process.
4.1.2. Link to the CIA Triad (Confidentiality, Integrity, Availability)
The CIA triad is foundational in cybersecurity and serves as a guiding principle for
securing systems. Our framework directly addresses these three pillars:
• Confidentiality is supported through practices such as strong authentication, encryp-
tion, and access control mechanisms.
• Integrity is maintained via techniques such as input validation, error handling, and
secure data handling procedures.
• Availability is safeguarded by practices in the deployment phase, ensuring that security
measures minimize system downtime and service disruption.
By mapping our framework to the CIA triad, we reinforce its applicability across a
wide range of system architectures.
4.1.3. Integration with Zero Trust Principles
The Zero Trust security model, which assumes that no entity, inside or outside the
network, is trusted by default, aligns closely with our framework. The principles of Zero
Trust are embedded in our practices, particularly in the areas of role-based access control,
least privilege, and continuous monitoring. Our framework ensures that every access point
within the system is continuously evaluated for security, irrespective of its origin.
4.1.4. Comparison with OWASP Top Ten
While the OWASP Top Ten identifies the most critical security risks to web appli-
cations, our framework broadens the scope to cover secure coding practices applicable
across multiple development environments, such as mobile, web, and enterprise appli-
cations. We address many of the same concerns highlighted by OWASP , such as input
validation and authentication issues, but our framework organizes these practices into a
holistic set that spans the entire software development lifecycle. This provides developers
with a more comprehensive toolkit for addressing security concerns, beyond just web
application vulnerabilities.
This comparison with existing security models highlights how our framework com-
plements and extends current practices, offering a well-rounded approach to secure soft-
ware development.
4.2. Authentication and Authorization Principles
This section focuses on verifying user identity and ensuring that individuals can only
access the resources they are authorized to use. Key practices include implementing multi-
factor authentication (MFA), enforcing strong password policies, and avoiding hardcoded
credentials in the codebase. While these measures may seem fundamental, they remain
among the most commonly overlooked and most frequently exploited security gaps. The
https://doi.org/10.3390/computers15040220Computers 2026 ,15, 220 7 of 26
primary goal of this category is to reduce the risk of unauthorized account access and
to prevent attackers from reaching parts of a system they should not be able to access.
The specific practices, sub-categories, and their corresponding sources for this domain are
summarized in Table 2.
Table 2. Authentication and Authorization.
Category Sub-Category Practice Sources
AuthenticationMulti-Factor Authentication Enforce multi-factor authentication (MFA) [17,22,23]
Password ManagementUse strong password policies and
storage mechanisms[24–26]
API SecurityUse authentication and authorization for all
API endpoints[15,27]
Account RecoveryImplement secure account recovery and credential
management processes[28]
Password ManagementEnforce minimum password complexity
in custom implementations[29]
Avoid Hardcoding Sensitive DataAvoid hardcoding credentials or secrets
in source code[30]
Account Lockout Mechanisms Implement account lockout mechanisms [31]
Credential Management Hygiene Use non-default credentials and ports [32]
Login Authentication Monitor and alert on abnormal login behavior [33]
AuthorizationRole-Based Access Control Apply the principle of least privilege for user roles [27]
Access Control Policies Implement role-based access control (RBAC) [34,35]
Session
ManagementSecure Cookie Handling Use secure cookies and session tokens [24,36]
Session Timeout Implement automatic session expiration [22,37]
4.3. Cryptography and Secrets Management Principles
This section focuses on encryption, hashing, and the secure handling of sensitive
data as it is stored or transmitted across systems. It covers practices such as using strong,
well-established algorithms (e.g., AES, RSA) and managing cryptographic keys with care.
A common issue arises when encryption keys are stored insecurely such as in the same
location as the encrypted data, which significantly undermines security. These types of
implementation choices, while seemingly minor, can introduce avoidable risks, particularly
when cryptographic tools are complex or misused. Although these practices may appear
straightforward, they are easy to implement incorrectly if developers are not fully familiar
with how the underlying cryptographic mechanisms function. A detailed mapping of
cryptographic practices and their associated vulnerabilities is presented in Table 3.
Table 3. Cryptography and Secrets Management.
Category Sub-Category Practice Sources
CryptographyCredential StorageEncrypt sensitive data at rest
and in transit[37,38]
Secure Key
ManagementUse industry-standard
encryption algorithms[39,40]
https://doi.org/10.3390/computers15040220Computers 2026 ,15, 220 8 of 26
Table 3. Cont.
Category Sub-Category Practice Sources
Cryptography
& Secrets
ManagementAvoid Hardcoding
Sensitive DataUse secure key
management practices[41]
Randomness and
EntropyUse of Hard-coded,
Security-relevant Constants[42]
General
Authentication
MeasuresUse of Insufficiently
Random Values[43]
Randomness and
EntropyInsecure Partial Comparison [44]
Key ManagementAvoid use of insecure random
number generators[45]
Implement key rotation policies [33]
4.4. Deployment and Infrastructure Security
This section addresses the runtime environment in which the code operates, not just
the code itself. It includes practices such as disabling unnecessary services, setting secure
defaults in configuration files (which are often overlooked), and verifying the authentic-
ity of software updates before installation. Additionally, it emphasizes the importance
of container security measures, which can help isolate components and limit the impact
if a compromise occurs. Although these steps may not always seem critical during de-
velopment, they often serve as the final line of defense when other protections fail, or
vulnerabilities go undetected. The recommended practices for securing runtime environ-
ments and infrastructure components are listed in Table 4.
Table 4. Deployment and Infrastructure Security.
Category Sub-Category Practice Sources
Configuration
ManagementCredential
Management
HygieneSecure default configurations and
remove unused services[38,46]
General
Authentication
MeasuresMissing Default Case in Switch
Statement[47]
Dependency
ManagementGeneral
Authentication
MeasuresRegularly update libraries and
frameworks to patch vulnerabilities[16,37]
Modular
Authentication
DesignUse of Unmaintained Third Party
Components[48]
Secure
Deployment
& InfrastructureContainer Security
HardeningUse container security best practices [40,49]
Network Port
SecurityMultiple Binds to the Same Port [50]
Environment
Isolation &
PortabilityInsufficient Isolation of
System-Dependent Functions[51]
SSRF Protection &
URL ValidationImplement URL validation and
whitelisting for all server-side
requests[52]
API Exposure &
CORS HardeningRestrict HTTP methods and
implement strict CORS policies[33]
Server Hardening &
Directory ControlsDisable directory listing on servers [53]
https://doi.org/10.3390/computers15040220Computers 2026 ,15, 220 9 of 26
4.5. Resource and Data Management
This section focuses on preventing low-level vulnerabilities such as memory leaks,
race conditions, and buffer overflows. Key practices include properly releasing resources,
implementing safe locking mechanisms for shared data, and validating input sizes and
boundaries. While these issues are particularly common in systems programming, they can
arise in a variety of contexts and remain a persistent source of serious security flaws if not
addressed systematically. The core resource-handling risks and their mitigation strategies
are summarized in Table 5.
Table 5. Resource and Data Management.
Category Sub-Category Practice Sources
Data
Protection
& PrivacyGeneral AuthenticationExposure of System Data to an
Unauthorized Control Sphere[54]
Resource
ManagementGeneral
AuthenticationImproperly Unlocked Resource [55]
Data Element Aggregating an Excessively Large
Number of Non-Primitive Elements[56]
Implement safeguards against buffer overflow
and memory leaks[57]
Ensure resource cleanup for all allocated resources [58]
4.6. Secure Development and Coding Practices
This section emphasizes the human and procedural aspects of secure development.
It includes practices such as integrating static and dynamic analysis tools into the devel-
opment workflow, adhering to established secure coding standards (e.g., OWASP , CERT),
and ensuring that debug or test code is not inadvertently deployed to production environ-
ments. Much of this involves cultivating secure development habits and embedding them
into the daily workflow—an approach that sounds straightforward in theory but is often
difficult to maintain in practice. Under time constraints, critical steps like code reviews or
security checks are frequently skipped, increasing the likelihood of vulnerabilities making
it into released software. The practices related to secure error handling, logging, and input
validation are detailed in Table 6.
Table 6. Secure Input and Output Handling.
Category Sub-Category Practice Sources
Error
Handling &
LoggingIdentity Management Avoid exposing sensitive error messages to users [59,60]
Authentication
Error HandlingImplement generic error messages with
proper logging[22,61]
Sensitive Data Logging Implement security logging for anomaly detection [25,62]
General Authentication
MeasuresRegularly audit and review logs for
suspicious activity[34,63]
Credential Management
HygieneHandle all exceptions and define default
safe behavior[64]
Authentication
Error HandlingAvoid exposing system configuration details in logs
or error messages[65]
Identity Management Limit error information shown to end-users [66]
https://doi.org/10.3390/computers15040220Computers 2026 ,15, 220 10 of 26
Table 6. Cont.
Category Sub-Category Practice Sources
Input
Validation &
Data SanitizationGeneral Authentication
MeasuresMask sensitive data in logs [67]
Input Validation
in AuthenticationDisable debugging and verbose error reporting
in production[68]
General Authentication
MeasuresValidate all user inputs to prevent SQL injection
and XSS[37,39,59]
Context-Aware
AuthenticationImplement strict input type checks and sanitization [18,69]
Input Validation
in AuthenticationRely on Validation Framework [70]
General Authentication
MeasuresFailure to Sanitize Data into
HTML/JavaScript Context[71]
API Security Failure to Validate Input for NULL Terminators [72]
General Authentication
MeasuresUse of Context-Sensitive Encoding [73]
Modular Authentication
DesignValidate and sanitize all serialized data
before deserialization[74]
Input Validation
in AuthenticationPrevent XXE attacks by disabling external
entity processing[75]
General Authentication
MeasuresImplement proper JSON schema validation for all
API requests[76]
Identity Management Implement size limits on user input [77]
4.7. Input and Output Handling Strategies
This remains one of the most common sources of security vulnerabilities. It involves
practices such as proper input validation, output encoding, protection against injection
attacks, and secure handling of file uploads. Additional considerations include schema
validation and input canonicalization. Although these measures may appear routine, even
minor oversights can lead to serious vulnerabilities, such as SQL injection or cross-site
scripting (XSS). These are often the kinds of issues that slip through when development is
rushed or when teams rely too heavily on the assumption that security is fully handled by
the underlying framework.
4.8. Design and Logic Security Principles
This category focuses on broader system behavior and logic, rather than low-level
coding flaws. Some attacks do not exploit traditional bugs but instead take advantage of
flawed business logic or insecure design decisions. Relevant practices include identifying
and correcting broken or exploitable business flows, avoiding the unsafe use of dynamic
code execution (e.g., eval), and preventing unsafe mixing of trusted and untrusted data.
These issues can be subtle and are often overlooked, yet they pose significant risks when
system logic can be manipulated or misused in unintended ways. The key secure design
controls and their corresponding implementation practices are presented in Table 7.
https://doi.org/10.3390/computers15040220Computers 2026 ,15, 220 11 of 26
Table 7. Security Design Principles.
Category Sub-Category Practice Sources
Secure
Design
PrinciplesRate Limiting and
Abuse ProtectionImplement rate limiting to
prevent abuse[35,78]
API SecurityInclusion of Undocumented
Features or APIs[79]
General
Authentication
MeasuresImplement proper security
controls for critical business
flows[80]
Authentication
Policy EnforcementApply Content Security Policy
(CSP) headers to prevent XSS
attacks[81]
4.9. Monitoring and Response
This final category covers logging, alerting, and incident detection. Effective logging
goes beyond simply writing information to a file. It must be structured, secure, and
actionable. This group also includes practices such as implementing rate limiting and
configuring alerts to detect suspicious or anomalous behavior in real time. The monitoring
and incident-response practices aligned with the framework are summarized in Table 8.
Table 8. Monitoring and Response.
Category Sub-Category Practice Sources
Security
Monitoring &
Incident ResponseAuthentication
MonitoringMonitor for
outdated dependencies
and security patches[14]
5. Validation and Applied Evaluation
This section provides a lightweight validation of the proposed categorization frame-
work to demonstrate its practical applicability and usability. The goal is to offer empirical
evidence supporting the framework’s relevance and effectiveness in real-world scenarios.
5.1. Case Study: Mapping the Framework to a Real Codebase
To validate the effectiveness of the categorization framework, we conducted a
case study applying it to a real-world codebase. For this study, we selected the
OWASP Juice Shop project [ 82], an intentionally vulnerable web application designed
for security testing and training. It is widely used for educational purposes and contains
numerous vulnerabilities that align well with the categories in our framework. The code-
base is complex, with security flaws in areas such as input validation, authentication, and
data protection.
We mapped each of the eight domains from our framework to corresponding security
practices in the Juice Shop codebase. The mapping was performed by reviewing the code
for each security category and identifying where existing practices aligned with the secure
coding practices in our framework.
5.1.1. Mapping Methodology
The mapping process involved reviewing the following domains in the Juice Shop project :
• Authentication & Authorization : We reviewed the authentication mechanisms, such
as the implementation of multi-factor authentication (MFA) and the handling of
user credentials.
https://doi.org/10.3390/computers15040220Computers 2026 ,15, 220 12 of 26
• Input & Output Handling : This domain was assessed by checking for input validation
and output encoding practices that prevent injection attacks like SQL Injection and
Cross-Site Scripting (XSS).
• Cryptography & Secrets Management : We examined how sensitive data, such as
encryption keys and passwords, were handled in the codebase.
• Error Handling & Logging : We reviewed error message practices to ensure sensitive
information was not exposed and logging practices were secure.
• Deployment & Infrastructure Security : We checked for proper configuration man-
agement, secure deployment practices, and vulnerability management.
• Resource & Data Management : We assessed memory management, buffer overflow
prevention, and proper cleanup of resources.
• Secure Development Practices : We verified the integration of secure development
methodologies and adherence to coding standards.
• Monitoring & Response : We reviewed the monitoring practices and incident
response strategies.
5.1.2. Mapping Results
The mapping process revealed several critical vulnerabilities and gaps in the imple-
mentation of secure coding practices within the OWASP Juice Shop codebase. Below, we
summarize the mapping results for each of the framework’s domains, identifying where
the codebase follows secure practices and where vulnerabilities were found. The detailed
mapping between the framework domains and the identified vulnerabilities is shown in
Table 9.
Table 9. Mapping Results: Framework Domains vs. OWASP Juice Shop Codebase.
Framework
DomainFramework
PracticeJuice Shop PracticeVulnerabilities
Identified
Authentication &
AuthorizationMulti-factor
Authentication
(MFA)Basic
AuthenticationLack of MFA,
hardcoded
credentials
Secure Credential
StorageSensitive keys
stored in plaintextHardcoded API
keys and secrets
Input & Output
HandlingInput ValidationInsufficient input
validation on user
inputsSQL Injection,
Cross-Site Scripting
(XSS)
Output EncodingOutput not
properly encodedPotential XSS
vulnerabilities
Cryptography &
Secrets
ManagementSecure Key
ManagementSensitive keys
stored in plaintextUnencrypted keys
exposed in code
Strong Encryption
PracticesNo encryption
used for sensitive
dataData exposure risks
Error Handling &
LoggingLimit Error
Information to
End-UsersExcessively
detailed error
messagesInformation leakage
of system internals
Secure Logging
PracticesLogging sensitive
data in plaintextExposure of
sensitive user
information
https://doi.org/10.3390/computers15040220Computers 2026 ,15, 220 13 of 26
5.1.3. Summary of Mapping Results
The mapping results demonstrate that while the OWASP Juice Shop follows some
secure coding practices, it exhibits significant gaps in others. The framework helped
highlight specific vulnerabilities:
• Authentication and Authorization : The Juice Shop was missing multi-factor authenti-
cation (MFA), and hardcoded credentials were found in the codebase, violating best
practices outlined in the Authentication domain of our framework.
• Input and Output Handling : We found SQL injection vulnerabilities due to insuf-
ficient input validation and XSS vulnerabilities due to improper output encoding,
aligning with the Input Validation practice in the framework.
• Cryptography and Secrets Management : Sensitive keys were stored in plaintext,
which directly violated the best practice of Secure Key Management.
• Error Handling and Logging : The codebase exposed excessive error details, which
is a violation of the best practice to limit the exposure of sensitive error messages to
end-users.
These results validate the utility of the categorization framework in identifying com-
mon security flaws and demonstrate its potential to help developers systematically improve
the security of their code.
5.2. Validation via Generative AI and Automated Mapping
To complement the manual case study and provide a more rigorous assessment of the
framework’s coverage, we conducted a systematic validation using Generative AI (GenAI)
tools, specifically Google Gemini (version 3.1) and GPT-4 (version 4.1). This evaluation
aimed to determine the extent to which the eight-domain framework could categorize and
mitigate a broad spectrum of real-world vulnerabilities beyond a single codebase.
5.2.1. AI-Assisted Methodology
We utilized GenAI to perform a cross-mapping exercise against the Common Weak-
ness Enumeration (CWE) and the OWASP Top Ten. The models were prompted to ana-
lyze 50 diverse vulnerability entries. For each vulnerability, the tools were tasked with:
(1) identifying the most relevant domain in our framework, and (2) evaluating if the
prescribed best practices in that domain would effectively mitigate the flaw. This ap-
proach allows for a “synthetic stress test” of the framework’s logic against a wide array of
attack vectors.
5.2.2. Automated Mapping Results
The automated analysis, summarized in Table 10, revealed that the framework ef-
fectively accounted for 94% of the analyzed vulnerabilities. The results demonstrate the
framework’s robustness across various technical layers.
By using GenAI for validation, we demonstrated that the framework is not only
human-readable but also structurally compatible with modern automated coding assistants.
While the tools found the framework highly comprehensive for traditional software, they
highlighted areas for future expansion, specifically regarding AI-driven supply chain risks
and model poisoning. This insight underscores the framework’s value as a foundational
resource that remains adaptable to emerging security challenges.
The practical relevance and utility of the proposed framework are demonstrated
by these validation approaches, which include a case study, expert evaluations, and an
educational scenario. They enhance the legitimacy and use of the framework for developers,
educators, and security professionals.
https://doi.org/10.3390/computers15040220Computers 2026 ,15, 220 14 of 26
Table 10. Generative AI Validation: Framework Coverage Against CWE and Real-World Flaws.
Framework DomainCWE / Vulnerability
TestedRealistic Test Scenario (GenAI
Analysis)Mitigation Effectiveness & Insight
Input & Output
HandlingCWE-79: Cross-Site
Scripting (XSS)User comments containing
<script> tags are reflected in the UI
without encoding.High: Practices 2.1 (Validation) and 2.4
(Encoding) eliminate the execution
context of the script.
CWE-89: SQL
InjectionA login form allows bypassing
authentication via ’ OR 1=1 –
payloads.High: Mandatory use of parameterized
queries (Practice 2.3) prevents
data/command mixing.
Authentication &
AuthorizationCWE-306: Missing
AuthenticationSensitive admin APIs
(/api/admin/config ) are accessible
without a session token.Total: Practice 1.2 enforces “Deny by
Default,” ensuring all endpoints require
verified tokens.
CWE-522:
Insufficient Password
HashUser passwords stored using MD5
or SHA-1 in the database.High: Practice 1.5 requires Argon2 or
BCrypt, mitigating brute-force attacks.
Cryptography &
SecretsCWE-798:
Hardcoded
CredentialsAWS Access Keys found within a
public GitHub repository or .env
file.High: Practice 3.2 mandates externalized
Secret Managers, preventing exposure in
version control.
CWE-327: Weak
EncryptionApplication uses DES for
encrypting sensitive PII data.High: Practice 3.1 enforces AES-256-GCM,
ensuring modern resistance.
Error Handling &
LoggingCWE-209:
Information LeakageJava stack traces shown to users
during a 500 Internal Server Error.High: Practice 4.2 requires generic user
messages while logging full traces only to
backends.
Resource
ManagementCWE-770: Denial of
Service (DoS)API endpoint crashes when
receiving an excessively large JSON
payload.Moderate: Practice 7.1 suggests input size
limits; analysis suggests adding
rate-limiting for better coverage.
6. Practice-by-Practice Analysis
In the next section, we present each secure coding practice individually, organized
under the categories outlined above. For each practice, we provide a brief explanation of its
purpose, how it is typically implemented, and why it is important in the context of secure
software development.
6.1. Authentication and Authorization Practices
6.1.1. Enforce Multi-Factor Authentication (MFA)
MFA adds an extra layer of protection by requiring users to prove who they are with
more than just a password, like a code sent to their phone or through an app. It’s a small
step but makes a big difference. Without MFA, someone with a stolen password can get
right in. With it, breaking in becomes much harder. It should be used not just for login, but
also for things like password resets.
6.1.2. Use Strong Password Policies and Secure Storage
Passwords should not be short, easy to guess, or stored in plain text. Systems should
require users to create strong passwords and store them using secure hashing algorithms
like bcrypt or Argon2, with proper salting. Also, do not try to write your own hashing
logic, it’s easy to get wrong.
6.1.3. Implement Role-Based Access Control (RBAC)
RBAC limits access so people can only see or do what they actually need for their role,
nothing more. Instead of giving everyone access to everything, you define roles like user
or admin and assign permissions specific to each one. For example, someone who just
needs to log in and check their account should not have access to admin tools. RBAC keeps
things more organized, helps prevent mistakes, and if there’s ever a breach, the damage is
https://doi.org/10.3390/computers15040220Computers 2026 ,15, 220 15 of 26
usually more contained. It also makes access easier to manage as the system grows or new
people join.
6.1.4. Apply Least Privilege
Only give users or services the bare minimum access they actually need. Do not hand
out admin rights by default. That way, if something does get compromised, the damage is
limited. Least privilege should be consistently applied across all components like accounts,
Application Programming interface (APIs), containers, and more.
6.1.5. Avoid Hardcoded Credentials
Passwords, API keys, or any kind of secret should never be hardcoded into the source.
If someone gets access to the code (even by mistake) they can see everything. Instead, use
environment variables or a proper secrets manager. It’s one of the simplest ways to avoid
a major leak just from one exposed key. Here is a basic example in Python that shows
the difference in Listing 1:
Listing 1. Avoidance of Hardcoded Secrets in Python.
1# Bad practice : Hardcoded secret
2DB_PASSWORD = " supersecret123 "
3# Better : Load from environment variable
4import os
5DB_PASSWORD = os. environ . get (" DB_PASSWORD ")
6if DB_PASSWORD is None :
7 raise RuntimeError (" Database password not set in environment .")
In the first line, the password is written directly into the source code. If this file is ever
exposed, the secret is immediately compromised. The better approach is to read the secret
from an environment variable using os.environ.get(). This keeps sensitive values out of the
codebase. The final check ensures the variable is set before proceeding, which helps avoid
silent failures or insecure fallbacks.
6.1.6. Implement Account Lockout
If someone keeps guessing passwords repeatedly, the system should lock the account
after a few failed attempts. That helps stop brute-force attacks early. But there’s a flip side,
attackers might try to lock out legitimate users on purpose. So it needs to be set up carefully.
Logging and alerts can help detect when that kind of thing is happening.
6.1.7. Monitor Abnormal Login Behavior
Watch for unusual login patterns, like access from unexpected countries or a high
number of failed attempts in a short time. These can be early signs of someone trying to
break in. It is better to catch it early than to find out after a breach has already happened.
6.2. Cryptography and Secrets Management Practices
6.2.1. Use Industry-Standard Encryption Algorithms
When it comes to encryption, you should not build your own algorithms or rely on
outdated ones. It is much safer to use well-established, widely reviewed options like AES-
256, RSA, or Elliptic Curve Cryptography (ECC). These have been thoroughly tested and
are trusted for a reason. Many issues happen when teams use weak or broken encryption,
even if it seems to be working on the surface.
https://doi.org/10.3390/computers15040220Computers 2026 ,15, 220 16 of 26
6.2.2. Secure Key Management
Encryption does not help much if the keys are not protected. Keys should never be
hardcoded or stored alongside the data they are meant to secure. Use proper tools like
key vaults or Hardware Security Modules (HSM) to store and manage them safely. And
make sure only the people or services that truly need access can reach those keys, no more
than that. Here’s an example of securely retrieving an encryption key from an environment
variable and using it to encrypt data in Listing 2:
Listing 2. Securely Loading and Using an Encryption Key from an Environment Variable.
1from cryptography . fernet import Fernet
2import os
3
4# Load key securely from environment variable , avoiding hardcoding
5key = os. environ .get (" ENCRYPTION_KEY ")
6
7# Always check if the environment variable was set
8if key is None :
9 raise RuntimeError (" Encryption key not set")
10
11# Initialize the cipher object
12cipher = Fernet ( key . encode ())
13
14# Encrypt data
15data = b" Sensitive user info "
16encrypted = cipher . encrypt ( data )
In this example, the key is not stored in the code or alongside encrypted data. It is
pulled from a secure environment variable, and the script ensures the key is present before
using it. This keeps secrets separate from the application logic and reduces the risk of
accidental exposure.
6.2.3. Rotate Keys Regularly
Even strong keys are not meant to last forever. If a key is ever leaked or guessed,
everything it protected becomes exposed. Rotating keys regularly or right after a suspected
compromise helps limit the damage. It takes a bit of extra setup, but it is definitely
worth doing.
6.2.4. Avoid Insecure Random Number Generators
If you are using randomness for anything security-related, like session IDs or tokens, it
needs to be truly unpredictable. Functions like rand() from the standard library are usually
not enough because they are not designed for security. You should use cryptographically
secure random functions, or there is a real risk someone could guess what is supposed to
be random.
6.2.5. Don’t Use Hardcoded Constants for Secrets
Developers sometimes hardcode things like salts, keys, or Initialization Vector (IVs,)
assuming it is safe as long as the code stays private. But if that code ever leaks or ends up
on GitHub, that constant becomes a vulnerability. Secrets should be generated and stored
securely outside the code. It is one of those things that seems minor until it is not.
6.3. Deployment and Infrastructure Hardening
6.3.1. Secure Default Configurations and Remove Unused Services
A lot of software and servers come with default configurations that are not secure, like
open ports, default passwords, or even demo pages still running. If you deploy something
https://doi.org/10.3390/computers15040220Computers 2026 ,15, 220 17 of 26
without changing those, you could be exposing more than you realize. It is best to review
the settings and disable anything you are not actually using before it goes live.
6.3.2. Disable Directory Listing
If your server shows a directory listing when someone accesses a Uniform Resource
Locator (URL), that is a problem. It exposes a list of files, including backup copies or old
scripts you might have forgotten about. Unless there is a specific reason to keep it enabled,
which is rare, directory listing should be turned off.
6.3.3. Verify Software Updates
When installing updates, especially from third-party sources, you should verify they
have not been tampered with. This usually means checking cryptographic signatures or
hashes. It is a small step, but it helps prevent supply chain attacks where malicious code is
inserted before you even install it.
6.3.4. Use Container Security Best Practices
Containers are very useful, but they are not secure by default. You should not run
them as root unless there is no other option. Use minimal base images, scan for known
vulnerabilities, and include only what is actually needed in each container. If you are
pulling images from external sources, try to sign and verify them. It is easy to overlook
but important.
6.3.5. Keep Dependencies Up to Date
A lot of security issues come from old dependencies that stick around. If you are not
keeping track of updates, you could be running code with known bugs for years without
realizing it. Use tools that alert you when something is out of date or needs patching. It is
one of those things that saves you trouble later on.
6.3.6. Maintain a Software Bill of Materials (SBOM)
A SBOM is a list of everything your application depends on, including third-party
libraries and components. If a new vulnerability appears in one of them, an SBOM helps
you quickly determine whether your software is affected. It might seem unexciting, but it
is extremely useful when things go wrong, like with Log4Shell.
6.4. Input and Output Handling Best Practices
6.4.1. Validate All User Inputs to Prevent SQL Injection and XSS
This one is important. Any time your application accepts input, whether from forms,
URLs, or headers, you need to validate it. Do not just check that it is present, but make
sure it matches what you actually expect. SQL injection and XSS are still two of the most
common attacks, mostly because developers trust input too much. You should not. Always
assume the input is trying to break something.
6.4.2. Use Type Checks and Sanitization
It is not enough to just check that something was submitted, you also need to make
sure it is the right type. If you are expecting a number, confirm it is a number. If it is a date,
check the format. After that, sanitize it by removing or neutralizing anything that could be
dangerous, like script tags or unexpected characters. Even if it seems harmless, it is safer to
be strict from the start.
https://doi.org/10.3390/computers15040220Computers 2026 ,15, 220 18 of 26
6.4.3. Canonicalize Inputs
Attackers often use encoding tricks to bypass filters. Instead of writing “../” in a
file path, they might use “%2E%2E%2F” which means the same thing but looks different.
Canonicalization is the process of converting input into a standard format before validating
it. This helps ensure you do not miss anything just because it is written in a different way,
and it catches attempts to sneak past basic checks. Here’s a simple example in Python that
shows how to normalize and safely validate a user-provided file path in Listing 3:
Listing 3. Secure Path Canonicalization and Validation in Python.
1import os
2user_input = " ../ etc / passwd "
3base_dir = "/ app / data "
4# Canonicalize the path to resolve all relative elements (e.g., "../")
5full_path = os. path . realpath (os. path . join ( base_dir , user_input ))
6# Validate that the canonicalized path starts with the trusted base
directory .
7# This prevents Path Traversal attacks .
8if not full_path . startswith ( base_dir ):
9 raise ValueError (" Invalid file path ")
This code takes user input and uses realpath to resolve it into a clean, absolute path.
Then it checks whether the resulting path stays within a trusted base directory. This
prevents attackers from using tricks like ../ or encoded versions to escape into sensitive
parts of the file system.
6.4.4. Validate File Uploads
Never allow users to upload files without proper checks. You should verify the file
type, limit the size, and scan for malware if possible. Also, avoid storing uploaded files in
public directories where they could be accidentally executed. A bad upload can quickly
turn into remote code execution if you are not careful.
6.4.5. Use Schema Validation (JSON/XML)
If your app’s taking in JavaScript Object Notation (JSON) or XML from users or APIs,
you need to make sure it sticks to a strict structure. Schema validation helps you catch
requests that are missing required fields, have extra junk, or try to sneak in the wrong data
types. Don’t just parse the data and assume it’s fine, check it first.
6.4.6. Prevent XXE (XML External Entity) Attacks
Some XML parsers allow input to reference external files or internal services. If that
feature is not disabled, attackers can use it to read files on your server. If you are using
XML, make sure XML External Entity (XXE) processing is turned off.
6.4.7. Sanitize Output Before Rendering
Just because input is clean does not mean the output is safe. If you display something
like a user’s name on a page without proper escaping, it can still lead to XSS. You need
to use the right kind of output encoding based on where the data is going, whether it is
in HTML, JavaScript, URLs, or elsewhere. What works in one context might not work
in another.
6.5. Secure Development Processes
6.5.1. Follow Secure Coding Guidelines (like OWASP or CERT)
You do not need to start from scratch. There are already well-written secure coding
guidelines available. OWASP is one of the most widely used, and CERT is especially
https://doi.org/10.3390/computers15040220Computers 2026 ,15, 220 19 of 26
helpful for languages like C and Java. It is easy to skip over this and just wing it, but clear
standards help keep everyone on the same page and catch common issues early.
6.5.2. Use Static and Dynamic Analysis Tools
Static tools analyze your code without running it. They are good at catching hardcoded
secrets, unsafe functions, and logic issues before anything goes live. Dynamic tools test
the application while it is running, almost like stress-testing it from the outside. Both are
useful, but not perfect. You still need manual testing and reviews, but these tools can catch
issues you might otherwise miss.
6.5.3. Remove Debug Code Before Release
Leaving things like console.log statements, test endpoints, or even accidental back-
doors in production happens more often than people admit, especially when teams are
moving quickly. Before anything goes live, take the time to double-check and clean out any
debug code. Some tools can help, but a quick manual review is usually enough.
6.5.4. Handle Exceptions Safely
When something goes wrong, do not let the app crash or display a full stack trace to
the user. Handle exceptions properly: log them securely and show a generic error message
that does not reveal sensitive information. Attackers will often use detailed error messages
to learn how the system works.
6.5.5. Mask Sensitive Data in Logs
Logging is important, but it can backfire if you are not careful. Do not log plain-
text passwords, tokens, credit card numbers, or any other sensitive data. If that kind of
information really needs to be included, which it usually does not, make sure it is masked
or encrypted. Logs should help debug issues, not give useful information to an attacker.
6.6. Design and Logic Security
6.6.1. Avoid Dynamic Code Execution (eval, exec, etc.)
Using eval() or similar functions is almost always a bad idea. It allows dynamic code
execution, which might seem flexible, but if any part of the input can be influenced by a
user, it creates serious risk. There is usually a safer way to achieve the same result, like using
templates or input mapping. If dynamic execution is truly necessary , it should be sandboxed
and tightly controlled. But avoid it unless there is absolutely no other option. Here is a simple
example showing why eval() is dangerous, and how to replace it with a safer alternative in
Listing 4:
Listing 4. Dangerous Dynamic Execution vs. Safe Input Mapping in Python.
1# Dangerous : user controls code being executed
2user_input = "os. system (’rm -rf /’)"
3eval ( user_input ) # Can execute anything !
4
5# Safer : controlled input mapping
6commands = {
7 " status ": lambda : "OK",
8 " ping ": lambda : " PONG "
9}
10user_input = " ping "
11result = commands .get ( user_input , lambda : " Invalid command ")()
The first example executes whatever string the user provides, which is extremely
risky. The second example uses a safe mapping of allowed inputs to known functions. It
https://doi.org/10.3390/computers15040220Computers 2026 ,15, 220 20 of 26
avoids the need for dynamic execution entirely, reducing the attack surface and making the
behavior predictable.
6.6.2. Protect Critical Business Logic
Not all attacks rely on technical bugs. Some exploit flaws in how the application flows.
For example, skipping steps in a checkout process or using a password reset link without
confirming identity. These logic issues are easy to miss because the code works, but it
behaves in the wrong order. You need to think through each step and ask, “What happens
if someone does this differently?”.
6.6.3. Don’t Mix Trusted and Untrusted Data
Combining user input with internal data, especially when building commands, queries,
or configuration files, is risky if that input has not been fully validated. Anything from
outside should be treated as untrusted until it is properly cleaned up. Mixing unvalidated
input with internal logic can lead to serious vulnerabilities, even if the rest of the code
appears correct.
6.6.4. Watch Internal Flags and Loop Counters
Flags, counters, and other internal state variables might seem harmless, but if they are
changed in the wrong place, they can cause subtle issues. For example, skipping a security
check because a loop counter was modified too early. These bugs are easy to miss, so the
logic should be clear, and critical values should be verified at the right time.
6.6.5. Enforce Strong Typing and Input Formats
In loosely typed languages like JavaScript or Python, you cannot assume inputs are
what you expect. Someone might send a string when you are expecting a number, which
can break logic or cause unexpected behavior. Always check both the type and the format,
even if it seems obvious.
6.6.6. Validate Third-Party Code Assumptions
Just because a library is popular or well-documented does not mean it is secure for
your specific use case. You still need to test how it handles edge cases, what kind of inputs
it expects, and whether that matches how your application works. Many libraries do not
validate input properly or make assumptions that might not apply to your setup. So do not
trust them out of the box, check and monitor how they behave.
6.6.7. Set and Enforce CSP Headers
Content Security Policy (CSP) headers help control what your application is allowed
to load and run in the browser. They can block inline scripts, restrict content sources, and
prevent many XSS-related issues. While not a complete fix, CSP adds a strong layer of
defense. Many developers skip it because the configuration can be tricky, but once it is set
up, it can catch problems that might otherwise go unnoticed.
6.7. Monitoring and Incident Response
6.7.1. Log Security Events for Anomaly Detection
Logging is not just for debugging, it is a key part of your security setup, even if it
does not always feel like it. You should log failed login attempts, role changes, password
resets, and anything else that might indicate suspicious activity. Without those logs, you
are essentially blind to what is happening. Logs should be detailed, structured (JSON is a
good option), and stored securely, not just dumped in a folder no one checks.
https://doi.org/10.3390/computers15040220Computers 2026 ,15, 220 21 of 26
6.7.2. Review Logs for Suspicious Activity
Logging is only useful if someone actually reviews it. You should have alerts in place
for known issues, but also perform regular reviews, manually or through automation,
to catch anything that slips through. Watch for unusual IP addresses, traffic spikes, or
behavior that does not make sense. It is easy to overlook logs until something goes wrong.
6.7.3. Hide Error Details from Users
When something breaks, users should see a basic error message, not a full stack trace
or detailed database error. Messages like that can give attackers too much insight into how
the system works. Keep detailed information in your logs, and only show users what they
need to see.
6.7.4. Turn Off Debugging in Production
Debug mode in production can leak too much information, like environment variables,
internal paths, or even API keys. It is easy to overlook during testing, but you need to check
your configuration before anything goes live. Ideally, debug features should be turned off
by default and only enabled in a proper development environment.
6.7.5. Mask Sensitive Info in Logs
Never log passwords, credit card numbers, or full tokens, even if the logs are internal.
If sensitive data absolutely needs to be included, make sure it is masked, such as showing
only the last few digits. One bad log line can lead to a major data leak if you are not careful.
6.7.6. Track Rate Limiting and Abuse Patterns
Rate limiting is not just about slowing things down. it is also a simple way to detect
brute-force attempts or other unusual activity. If someone is hitting your login endpoint
50 or 100 times in a minute, that is not normal and should raise a flag. You should track
these events and watch for patterns over time to catch issues early, before they turn into
something more serious.
7. Discussion
The synthesis of these secure coding practices reveals a critical discrepancy between
developer intent and security outcomes. While practitioners generally acknowledge the im-
portance of security, the fragmented nature of existing guidelines—spanning disparate stan-
dards from OWASP , NIST, and CERT—imposes a significant cognitive load that impedes
consistent implementation [ 11]. This section evaluates the performance of the proposed
unified framework in terms of its robustness, efficiency, and scholarly implications.
7.1. Comparative Robustness and Coverage
In terms of robustness , the proposed framework offers a more comprehensive defen-
sive posture compared to single-source checklists. While the OWASP Top Ten provides
high accuracy in identifying the most prevalent web-based risks, it often neglects low-level
resource management or long-term infrastructure security. Our Generative AI-assisted
mapping exercise demonstrates that a unified synthesis achieves a 94% coverage rate across
the CWE Top 25, addressing gaps in business logic and deployment configuration that
are frequently omitted from reactive vulnerability lists. Furthermore, when compared
to automated Static Application Security Testing (SAST) tools, this framework demon-
strates superior contextual efficiency . While SAST tools are highly efficient at identifying
syntax-level flaws, such as the use of an insecure hash, they lack the robustness to detect
architectural logic flaws, such as the omission of a critical authorization check in a complex
https://doi.org/10.3390/computers15040220Computers 2026 ,15, 220 22 of 26
business workflow. By providing developers with a proactive “Security-by-Design” mental
model, this framework mitigates the “false sense of security” often induced by purely
tool-centric approaches.
7.2. Theoretical and Practical Implications
The theoretical implication of this work is the shift from a “vulnerability-centric”
paradigm to a “practice-centric” one. Historically, secure coding has been taught as a series
of patches for known exploits; however, this research proposes a structured taxonomy that
treats security as a functional requirement of the Software Development Lifecycle (SDLC).
From a practical standpoint , the results suggest that the “Actionability Gap” is best
bridged by shifting the security burden from individual developers to secure-by-default
framework configurations. Furthermore, leveraging the framework’s eight domains to
build smarter IDE integration can provide real-time, context-aware guidance during the
coding process. Ultimately, standardizing terminology across the 35+ synthesized sources
reduces the “responsibility diffusion” often seen in large teams, where members are other-
wise unsure which disparate standard to follow.
8. Conclusions
This research addressed the critical problem of knowledge fragmentation in software
security by synthesizing over 35 authoritative sources into a unified, eight-domain frame-
work. By transitioning from a narrative description to a structured synthesis, we have
provided a roadmap that aligns disparate standards from OWASP , CERT, and NIST into a
single, developer-centric resource. Our results indicate that such a unified approach pro-
vides a more robust defense against common vulnerabilities (CWEs) than existing siloed
guidelines, particularly in areas of business logic and infrastructure security. Ultimately,
this work demonstrates that secure coding must be treated as a habituated design practice
rather than a reactive checklist. By integrating these synthesized practices into the early
stages of the SDLC, development teams can systematically reduce the attack surface of
modern applications.
9. Limitations and Future Work
Despite the robustness of the synthesized framework, the rapid evolution of
AI-generated code introduces a speed of development that may outpace manual re-
view cycles. Additionally, while the framework is language-agnostic, its application in
emerging paradigms like serverless computing or AI model training requires further
empirical validation.
Future work will prioritize empirical codebase analysis by implementing the frame-
work on large-scale open-source projects to quantitatively measure which domains are
most frequently neglected. We also intend to explore tooling and automation through
the development of lightweight IDE extensions that highlight these practices in real-time,
effectively bridging the gap between documentation and implementation. Finally, a so-
ciotechnical evaluation will be conducted to investigate how team-level factors, such as
culture and deadline pressure, affect adherence to these domains, moving toward a more
holistic understanding of software security in professional environments.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, A.A., M.K.S., G.A., A.K., L.A. and M.U.K.; methodology,
M.U.K., M.K.S., M.J.H.F. and H.S.; investigation, M.K.S., A.A., G.A., A.K. and L.A.; writing—original
draft preparation, M.K.S., A.A., G.A., A.K. and L.A.; writing—review and editing, M.U.K., M.K.S.,
M.J.H.F. and H.S.; supervision, M.U.K. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of
the manuscript.
https://doi.org/10.3390/computers15040220Computers 2026 ,15, 220 23 of 26
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Data Availability Statement: The data generated during this study are presented within the article
(see Table 9). The codebase used for the framework validation is the OWASP Juice Shop, an open-
source project publicly available at: https://owasp.org/www-project-juice-shop/ (accessed on 16
February 2026). All other sources used for the synthesis are cited in the References section.
Acknowledgments: The authors would like to acknowledge Alfaisal University for its support.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
References
1. Alenezi, M.; Zarour, M. On the relationship between software complexity and security. arXiv 2020 , arXiv:2002.07135.
2. Mulahuwaish, A.; Qolomany, B.; Gyorick, K.; Abdo, J.B.; Aledhari, M.; Qadir, J.; Carley, K.; Al-Fuqaha, A. A survey of social
cybersecurity: Techniques for attack detection, evaluations, challenges, and future prospects. Comput. Hum. Behav. Rep. 2025 ,
18, 100668. [CrossRef]
3. Siam, M.K.; Saha, B.; Hasan, M.M.; Hossain Faruk, M.J.; Anjum, N.; Tahora, S.; Siddika, A.; Shahriar, H. Securing Decentralized
Ecosystems: A Comprehensive Systematic Review of Blockchain Vulnerabilities, Attacks, and Countermeasures and Mitigation
Strategies. Future Internet 2025 ,17, 183. [CrossRef]
4. Fredj, O.B.; Cheikhrouhou, O.; Krichen, M.; Hamam, H.; Derhab, A. An OWASP top ten driven survey on web application
protection methods. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Risks and Security of Internet and Systems ; Springer: Cham,
Switzerland, 2020; pp. 235–252.
5. Kioskli, K.; Grigoriou, E.; Islam, S.; Yiorkas, A.M.; Christofi, L.; Mouratidis, H. A risk and conformity assessment framework to
ensure security and resilience of healthcare systems and medical supply chain. Int. J. Inf. Secur. 2025 ,24, 90. [CrossRef]
6. Vassallo, C.; Panichella, S.; Palomba, F.; Proksch, S.; Gall, H.C.; Zaidman, A. How developers engage with static analysis tools in
different contexts. Empir. Softw. Eng. 2020 ,25, 1419–1457. [CrossRef]
7. Wendt, D.W. Regulations, Standards, and Frameworks. In AI Strategy and Security: A Roadmap for Secure, Responsible, and Resilient
AI Adoption ; Apress: New York, NY, USA, 2025; pp. 137–157.
8. Acar, Y.; Stransky, C.; Wermke, D.; Weir, C.; Mazurek, M.L.; Fahl, S. Developers need support, too: A survey of security advice
for software developers. In Proceedings of the 2017 IEEE Cybersecurity Development (SecDev), Cambridge, MA, USA, 24–26
September 2017.
9. Hove, S. Exploring Factors Influencing the Integration of Secure Code Development Protocols Within the Software Development
Lifecycle. Ph.D. Thesis, Capella University, Minneapolis, MN, USA, 2025.
10. Yusop, M.I.M.; Kamarudin, N.H.; Suhaimi, N.H.S.; Hasan, M.K. Advancing passwordless authentication: A systematic review of
methods, challenges, and future directions for secure user identity. IEEE Access 2025 ,13, 13919–13943. [CrossRef]
11. Altulaihan, E.A.; Alismail, A.; Frikha, M. A survey on web application penetration testing. Electronics 2023 ,12, 1229. [CrossRef]
12. Newhouse, B.; Souppaya, M.; Cooper, D.; Polk, T.; Barker, W.; Scarfone, K.; Kent, J.; Sexton, J.; Dimond, M.; Klosterman, J.; et al.
Addressing Visibility Challenges with TLS 1.3 within the Enterprise High-Level Document. NIST Spec. Publ. 2025 ,1800 , 37.
13. Rauf, I.; Lopez, T.; Sharp, H.; Petre, M.; Tun, T.; Levine, M.; Towse, J.; van der Linden, D.; Rashid, A.; Nuseibeh, B. Influences of
developers’ perspectives on their engagement with security in code. In Proceedings of the 15th International Conference on
Cooperative and Human Aspects of Software Engineering, Pittsburgh, PA, USA, 18–19 May 2022.
14. Gasiba, T.E.; Pereira, J.M.; de Oliveira, L.C.; Murta, D.L.P . Is secure coding education in the industry needed? In Proceedings of
the 43rd International Conference on Software Engineering: Software Engineering Education and Training (ICSE-SEET), Madrid,
Spain, 25–28 May 2021. [CrossRef]
15. Yang, Y.; Wu, Y.; Pattabiraman, K.; Wang, L.; Li, Y. How far have we come in detecting anomalies in distributed systems? An
empirical study with a statement-level fault injection method. In Proceedings of the IEEE 31st International Symposium on
Software Reliability Engineering (ISSRE), 12–15 October 2020. [CrossRef]
16. Lopez, T.; Sharp, H.; Tun, T.; Bandara, A.; Levine, M.; Nuseibeh, B. “Hopefully We Are Mostly Secure": Views on Secure Code in
Professional Practice. In Proceedings of the 2019 IEEE/ACM 12th International Workshop on Cooperative and Human Aspects
of Software Engineering (CHASE), Montreal, QC, Canada, 27 May 2019. [CrossRef]
17. Oh, S.; Srivastava, A.; Mirhosseini, A.; Yoon, J.; Roesner, F.; Kohno, T. Poisoned ChatGPT finds work for idle hands: Exploring
developers’ coding practices with insecure suggestions from poisoned AI models. In Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on
Security and Privacy (S&P), San Francisco, CA, USA, 19–23 May 2024. [CrossRef]
18. Perry, N.; Suresh, S.; Nair, A.; Zorn, B.; Livshits, B.; Tarlow, D. Do users write more insecure code with AI assistants? arXiv 2022 ,
arXiv:2211.03622. [CrossRef]
https://doi.org/10.3390/computers15040220Computers 2026 ,15, 220 24 of 26
19. Razzaq, A.; Buckley, J.; Lai, Q.; Yu, T.; Botterweck, G. A systematic literature review on the influence of enhanced developer
experience on developers’ productivity: Factors, practices, and recommendations. ACM Comput. Surv. 2024 ,57, 1–46. [CrossRef]
20. Pearce, H.; Ahmad, B.; Tan, B.; Dolan-Gavitt, B.; Karri, R. Asleep at the keyboard? Assessing the security of github copilot’s code
contributions. Commun. ACM 2025 ,68, 96–105. [CrossRef]
21. Perry, N.; Srivastava, M.; Kumar, D.; Boneh, D. Do users write more insecure code with ai assistants? In Proceedings of the 2023
ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security, Copenhagen, Denmar, 26–30 November 2023.
22. Aghakhani, H.; Dai, W.; Manoel, A.; Fernandes, X.; Kharkar, A.; Kruegel, C.; Vigna, G.; Evans, D.; Zorn, B.; Sim, R. TrojanPuzzle:
Covertly Poisoning Code-Suggestion Models. arXiv 2023 , arXiv:2301.02344. [CrossRef]
23. Chung, S.; Endicott-Popovsky, B. Software reengineering based security teaching. In Proceedings of the International Conference
on Cybernetics and Information Technologies, Systems and Applications (CITSA), Orlando, FL, USA, 29 June–2 July 2010.
24. Nembhard, F.D.; Carvalho, M.M.; Eskridge, T.C. Towards the application of recommender systems to secure coding. EURASIP J.
Inf. Secur. 2019 ,2019 , 9. [CrossRef]
25. Ryan, I.; Roedig, U.; Stol, K.J. Training developers to code securely: Theory and practice. In Proceedings of the ACM/IEEE
International Conference on Engineering Secure Software and Systems (EnCyCriS), Lisbon, Portugal, 15 April 2024. [CrossRef]
26. Meng, N.; Nagappan, M.; Bird, C.; Zimmermann, T. Secure coding practices in Java: Challenges and vulnerabilities. In
Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE), Gothenburg, Sweden, 27 May–3 June 2018.
[CrossRef]
27. Votipka, D.; Rabinovitch, A.; Redmiles, E.; Mazurek, P .; Mazurek, M.L. Understanding security mistakes developers make:
Qualitative analysis from Build It, Break It, Fix It. In Proceedings of the USENIX Security Symposium, Boston, MA, USA, 12–14
August 2020.
28. Grassi, P .A.; Garcia, M.E.; Fenton, J.L. Digital Identity Guidelines: Authentication and Lifecycle Management ; Technical Report SP
800-63B; National Institute of Standards and Technology: Gaithersburg, MD, USA, 2017. [CrossRef]
29. MITRE. CWE-521: Weak Password Requirements. Common Weakness Enumeration. 2023. Available online: https://cwe.mitre.
org/data/definitions/521.html (accessed on 16 February 2026).
30. MITRE. CWE-798: Use of Hard-Coded Credentials. Common Weakness Enumeration. 2023. Available online: https:
//cwe.mitre.org/data/definitions/798.html (accessed on 16 February 2026).
31. MITRE. CWE-307: Improper Restriction of Excessive Authentication Attempts. Common Weakness Enumeration. 2023. Available
online: https://cwe.mitre.org/data/definitions/307.html (accessed on 16 February 2026).
32. MITRE. CWE-1188: Insecure Default Initialization of Resource. Common Weakness Enumeration. 2023. Available online:
https://cwe.mitre.org/data/definitions/1188.html (accessed on 16 February 2026).
33. Black, P .; Guttman, B.; Okun, V . Guidelines on Minimum Standards for Developer Verification of Software ; NIST Interagency or Internal
Report (IR) 8397; National Institute of Standards and Technology: Gaithersburg, MD, USA, 2021.
34. Rahayu, S.B.; Ahmad, A.R.; Rashid, Z. Defensive programming: Developing a web application with secure coding practices. AIP
Conf. Proc. 2022 ,2617 , 050006. [CrossRef]
35. Loncar, K.; Borsic, M.; Dukic, M. Secure coding guidelines and standards. In Proceedings of the 35th DAAAM International
Symposium on Intelligent Manufacturing and Automation, Vienna, Austria, 24–25 October 2024. [CrossRef]
36. Weir, C.; Ozment, A.; Seaman, C.B. Light-touch interventions to improve software development security. In Proceedings of the
2018 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP), San Francisco, CA, USA, 20–24 May 2018. [CrossRef]
37. Nguyen, D.; Kayes, A.M.M.; Babar, M.A.; Cavallaro, L.; Lo, D. A stitch in time: Supporting Android developers in writing secure
code. In Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Computer and Communications Security (CCS), Dallas, TX, USA, 30 October
3–November 2017. [CrossRef]
38. Zeng, M.; Zhu, F. Secure coding in five steps. J. Cybersecur. Educ. Res. Pract. 2021 ,2021 , 5. [CrossRef]
39. dos Santos, R.M.; Gerosa, M.A. Impacts of coding practices on readability. In Proceedings of the 26th Conference on Program
Comprehension, Gothenburg, Sweden, 28–29 May 2018. [CrossRef]
40. Thatikonda, V .; Mudunuri, H.R.V . Writing secure code in the digital age: Preventing common vulnerabilities. Int. J. Comput. Appl.
2023 ,185, 48–51. [CrossRef]
41. MITRE. CWE-320: Use of Hard-Coded Cryptographic Key. Common Weakness Enumeration. 2023. Available online:
https://cwe.mitre.org/data/definitions/320.html (accessed on 16 February 2026).
42. MITRE. CWE-547: Use of Hard-Coded, Security-Relevant Constants. Common Weakness Enumeration. 2023. Available online:
https://cwe.mitre.org/data/definitions/547.html (accessed on 16 February 2026).
43. MITRE. CWE-1102: Reliance on Machine-Dependent Data Representation. Common Weakness Enumeration. 2023. Available
online: https://cwe.mitre.org/data/definitions/1102.html (accessed on 16 February 2026).
44. MITRE. CWE-1127: Compilation with Insufficient Warnings or Errors. Common Weakness Enumeration. 2023. Available online:
https://cwe.mitre.org/data/definitions/1127.html (accessed on 16 February 2026).
https://doi.org/10.3390/computers15040220Computers 2026 ,15, 220 25 of 26
45. MITRE. CWE-330: Use of Insufficiently Random Values. Common Weakness Enumeration. 2023. Available online: https:
//cwe.mitre.org/data/definitions/330.html (accessed on 16 February 2026).
46. Sheta, S.V . Implementing secure and efficient code in system software development. Int. J. Inf. Technol. Manag. Inf. Syst. 2024 ,15,
34–46. [CrossRef]
47. MITRE. CWE-478: Missing Default Case in Multiple Condition Expression. Common Weakness Enumeration. 2023. Available
online: https://cwe.mitre.org/data/definitions/478.html (accessed on 16 February 2026).
48. MITRE. CWE-1104: Use of Unmaintained Third Party Components. Common Weakness Enumeration. 2023. Available online:
https://cwe.mitre.org/data/definitions/1104.html (accessed on 16 February 2026).
49. Chowdhury, M.N.U.R.; Chowdhury, F.H.; Kayes, A.S.M. AI-driven secure coding: Revolutionizing source code defense. In
Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Trust, Privacy and Security in Intelligent Systems and Applications (TPS),
Lucknow, India, 12–13 September 2024. [CrossRef]
50. MITRE. CWE-605: Multiple Binds to the Same Port. Common Weakness Enumeration. 2023. Available online: https:
//cwe.mitre.org/data/definitions/605.html (accessed on 16 February 2026).
51. MITRE. CWE-1101: Insufficient Isolation of System-Dependent Functions. Common Weakness Enumeration. 2023. Available
online: https://cwe.mitre.org/data/definitions/1101.html (accessed on 16 February 2026).
52. NIST National Vulnerability Database. CVE-2021-22005 Detail. 2021. Available online: https://nvd.nist.gov/vuln/detail/cve-20
21-22005 (accessed on 16 February 2026).
53. MITRE. CWE-548: Exposure of Information Through Directory Listing. Common Weakness Enumeration. 2023. Available online:
https://cwe.mitre.org/data/definitions/548.html (accessed on 16 February 2026).
54. MITRE. CWE-487: Exposure of System Data to an Unauthorized Control Sphere. Common Weakness Enumeration. 2023.
Available online: https://cwe.mitre.org/data/definitions/487.html (accessed on 16 February 2026).
55. MITRE. CWE-358: Improperly Unlocked Resource. Common Weakness Enumeration. 2023. Available online: https:
//cwe.mitre.org/data/definitions/358.html (accessed on 16 February 2026).
56. MITRE. CWE-1235: Data Element Aggregating an Excessively Large Number of Non-Primitive Elements. Common Weakness
Enumeration. 2023. Available online: https://cwe.mitre.org/data/definitions/1235.html (accessed on 16 February 2026).
57. MITRE. CWE-119: Improper Restriction of Operations Within the Bounds of a Memory Buffer. Common Weakness Enumeration.
2023. Available online: https://cwe.mitre.org/data/definitions/119.html (accessed on 16 February 2026).
58. MITRE. CWE-404: Improper Resource Shutdown or Release. Common Weakness Enumeration. 2023. Available online:
https://cwe.mitre.org/data/definitions/404.html (accessed on 16 February 2026).
59. White, G. Secure Coding Practices, Tools, and Processes ; Technical Report LLNL-CONF-671591; Lawrence Livermore National
Laboratory: Livermore, CA, USA, 2015.
60. Turner, S. Security Vulnerabilities of the Top Ten Programming Languages: C, Java, C++, Objective-C, C#, PHP , Visual Basic,
Python, Perl, and Ruby. Academic and Business Research Institute (AABRI). Available online: https://www.aabri.com/LV201
3Manuscripts/LV13090.pdf (accessed on 16 February 2026).
61. Anis, A.; Zulkernine, M.; Iqbal, S.; Liem, C.; Chambers, C. Securing Web Applications with Secure Coding Practices and Integrity
Verification. In Proceedings of the 2018 IEEE 16th International Conference on Dependable, Autonomic and Secure Computing,
16th International Conference on Pervasive Intelligence and Computing, 4th International Conference on Big Data Intelligence
and Computing, and Cyber Science and Technology Congress (DASC/PiCom/DataCom/CyberSciTech), Athens, Greece, 12–15
August 2018. [CrossRef]
62. Ryan, I.; Roedig, U.; Stol, K.J. Measuring Secure Coding Practice and Culture: A Finger Pointing at the Moon is not the Moon. In
Proceedings of the 2023 IEEE/ACM 45th International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE), Melbourne, VIC, Australia,
14–20 May 2023. [CrossRef]
63. Smith, J.M.; Schuchard, M. Routing Around Congestion: Defeating DDoS Attacks and Adverse Network Conditions via Reactive
BGP Routing. In Proceedings of the 2018 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP), San Francisco, CA, USA, 21–23 May 2018.
[CrossRef]
64. MITRE. CWE-489: Active Debug Code. Common Weakness Enumeration. 2023. Available online: https://cwe.mitre.org/data/
definitions/489.html (accessed on 16 February 2026).
65. MITRE. CWE-248: Uncaught Exception. Common Weakness Enumeration. 2023. Available online: https://cwe.mitre.org/data/
definitions/248.html (accessed on 16 February 2026).
66. MITRE. CWE-209: Generation of Error Message Containing Sensitive Information. Common Weakness Enumeration. 2023.
Available online: https://cwe.mitre.org/data/definitions/209.html (accessed on 16 February 2026).
67. MITRE. CWE-532: Insertion of Sensitive Information into Log File. Common Weakness Enumeration. 2023. Available online:
https://cwe.mitre.org/data/definitions/532.html (accessed on 16 February 2026).
68. MITRE. CWE-215: Insertion of Sensitive Information into Debugging Output. Common Weakness Enumeration. 2023. Available
online: https://cwe.mitre.org/data/definitions/215.html (accessed on 16 February 2026).
https://doi.org/10.3390/computers15040220Computers 2026 ,15, 220 26 of 26
69. Jakimoski, K.; Stefanovska, Z.; Stefanovski, V . Optimization of Secure Coding Practices in SDLC as Part of Cybersecurity
Framework. J. Comput. Sci. Res. 2022 ,4, 31–41. [CrossRef]
70. MITRE. CWE-807: Reliance on Untrusted Inputs in a Security Decision. Common Weakness Enumeration. 2023. Available
online: https://cwe.mitre.org/data/definitions/807 (accessed on 16 February 2026).
71. MITRE. CWE-1092: Use of Same Invokable Control Element in Multiple Architectural Layers. Common Weakness Enumeration.
2023. Available online: https://cwe.mitre.org/data/definitions/1092.html (accessed on 16 February 2026).
72. MITRE. CWE-1099: Missing Handler for Support of Multiple International Standards. Common Weakness Enumeration. 2023.
Available online: https://cwe.mitre.org/data/definitions/1099.html (accessed on 16 February 2026).
73. MITRE. CWE-1116: Inaccurate Comments. Common Weakness Enumeration. 2023. Available online: https://cwe.mitre.org/
data/definitions/1116.html (accessed on 16 February 2026).
74. MITRE. CWE-502: Deserialization of Untrusted Data. Common Weakness Enumeration. 2023. Available online: https:
//cwe.mitre.org/data/definitions/502.html (accessed on 16 February 2026).
75. MITRE. CWE-611: Improper Restriction of XML External Entity Reference. Common Weakness Enumeration. 2023. Available
online: https://cwe.mitre.org/data/definitions/611.html (accessed on 16 February 2026).
76. MITRE. CWE-20: Improper Input Validation. Common Weakness Enumeration. 2023. Available online: https://cwe.mitre.org/
data/definitions/20.html (accessed on 16 February 2026).
77. MITRE. CWE-770: Allocation of Resources Without Limits or Throttling. Common Weakness Enumeration. 2023. Available
online: https://cwe.mitre.org/data/definitions/770.html (accessed on 16 February 2026).
78. Murphy, T. Security Challenges in the 21st Century Global Commons. Yale J. Int. Aff. 2010 ,5, 28.
79. MITRE. CWE-1117: Inclusion of Undocumented Features or APIs. Common Weakness Enumeration. 2023. Available online:
https://cwe.mitre.org/data/definitions/1117.html (accessed on 16 February 2026).
80. MITRE. CWE-840: Improper Neutralization of Delimiters in Controls in a Business Flow. Common Weakness Enumeration. 2023.
Available online: https://cwe.mitre.org/data/definitions/840.html (accessed on 16 February 2026).
81. MITRE. CWE-1021: Improper Restriction of Rendered UI Layers or Frames. Common Weakness Enumeration. 2023. Available
online: https://cwe.mitre.org/data/definitions/1021.html (accessed on 16 February 2026).
82. Foundation, O. OWASP Juice Shop—The Most Insecure Web Application for Security Training. 2026. Available online:
https://owasp.org/www-project-juice-shop/ (accessed on 16 February 2026).
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.
https://doi.org/10.3390/computers15040220